
Page#1

Page#2
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 10-K
(Mark One)
Í
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(D) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
F M 31, 2016
OR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDED AY
OR
‘
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(D) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
F .
OR THE TRANSITION PERIOD FROM TO
Commission File No. 1-10635
NIKE, Inc.
(Exact name of Registrant as specified in its charter)
OREGON 93-0584541
(State or other jurisdiction of incorporation) (IRS Employer Identification No.)
One Bowerman Drive, Beaverton, Oregon 97005-6453
(Address of principal executive offices) (Zip Code)
(503) 671-6453
(Registrant’s Telephone Number, Including Area Code)
SECURITIES REGISTERED PURSUANT TO SECTION 12(B) OF THE ACT:
Class B Common Stock New York Stock Exchange
(Title of Each Class) (Name of Each Exchange on Which Registered)
SECURITIES REGISTERED PURSUANT TO SECTION 12(G) OF THE ACT:
NONE
Indicate by check mark: YES NO
• if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the
Í ‘
Securities Act.
(cid:129) if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of
‘ Í
the Act.
(cid:129) whether the Registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d)
of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such
shorter period that the Registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been
Í ‘
subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.
(cid:129) whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate
Website, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted
pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding
12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and
Í ‘
post such files).
(cid:129) if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K (§229.405 of this
chapter) is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of Registrant’s
knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in
Í
Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this Form 10-K.
(cid:129) whether the Registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See the definitions
of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Í ‘ ‘ ‘
Large accelerated filer Accelerated filer Non-accelerated filer Smaller reporting company
‘ Í
(cid:129) whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Act).
As of November 30, 2015, the aggregate market values of the Registrant’s Common Stock held by non-affiliates were:
Class A $ 4,075,394,149
Class B 89,393,235,582
$93,468,629,731
As of July 15, 2016, the number of shares of the Registrant’s Common Stock outstanding were:
Class A 329,251,752
Class B 1,348,366,883
1,677,618,635
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE:
Parts of Registrant’s Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of Shareholders to be held on September 22, 2016 are incorporated by
reference into Part III of this Report.
55
Page#3
NIKE, INC.
ANNUAL REPORT ON FORM 10-K
Table of Contents
Page
PART I 57
ITEM 1. Business 57
   
General 57
   
Products 57
   
Sales and Marketing 58
   
United States Market 58
   
International Markets 58
   
Significant Customer 59
   
Orders 59
   
Product Research, Design and Development 59
  
Manufacturing 59
   
International Operations and Trade 60
  
Competition 60
   
Trademarks and Patents 60
  .
Employees 61
   
Executive Officers of the Registrant 61
  
ITEM 1A. Risk Factors 62
   
ITEM 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments 69
  
ITEM 2. Properties 69
   
ITEM 3. Legal Proceedings 69
   
ITEM 4. Mine Safety Disclosures 69
  .
PART II 70
ITEM 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases
of Equity Securities 70
   
ITEM 6. Selected Financial Data 72
   
ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations 74
 
ITEM 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk 95
 
ITEM 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data 96
  
ITEM 9. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure 124
 
ITEM 9A. Controls and Procedures 124
  
ITEM 9B. Other Information 124
   
PART III 125
(Except for the information set forth under “Executive Officers of the Registrant” in Item 1
above, Part III is incorporated by reference from the Proxy Statement for the NIKE, Inc. 2016
Annual Meeting of Shareholders.)
ITEM 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance 125
  
ITEM 11. Executive Compensation 125
  
ITEM 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related
Stockholder Matters 125
   
ITEM 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions and Director Independence 125
 
ITEM 14. Principal Accountant Fees and Services 125
  
PART IV 126
ITEM 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules 126
  
Signatures 131
   
56
Page#4
PART I
PART I
ITEM 1. Business
General
NIKE, Inc. was incorporated in 1967 under the laws of the State of Oregon. As statements and other information regarding issuers that file electronically. Also
used in this report, the terms “we,” “us,” “NIKE,” and the “Company” refer to available on our corporate website are the charters of the committees of our
NIKE, Inc. and its predecessors, subsidiaries and affiliates, collectively, unless Board of Directors, as well as our corporate governance guidelines and code
the context indicates otherwise. Our NIKE e-commerce website is located at of ethics; copies of any of these documents will be provided in print to any
www.nike.com. On our NIKE corporate website, located at news.nike.com, shareholder who submits a request in writing to NIKE Investor Relations, One
we post the following filings as soon as reasonably practicable after they are Bowerman Drive, Beaverton, Oregon 97005-6453.
K
electronically filed with or furnished to the United States Securities and
-
Our principal business activity is the design, development and worldwide
Exchange Commission (the “SEC”): our annual report on Form 10-K, our 0
marketing and selling of athletic footwear, apparel, equipment, accessories 1
quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, our current reports on Form 8-K and any
and services. NIKE is the largest seller of athletic footwear and apparel in the
M
amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or
world. We sell our products to retail accounts, through NIKE-owned retail
15(d) of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. Our definitive R
stores and internet websites (which we refer to collectively as our “Direct to
O
Proxy Statements are also posted on our corporate website. All such filings
Consumer” or “DTC” operations), and through a mix of independent
F
on our corporate website are available free of charge. Copies of these filings
distributors and licensees throughout the world. Virtually all of our products
may also be obtained by visiting the Public Reference Room of the SEC at
are manufactured by independent contractors. Nearly all footwear and
100 F Street, NE, Washington, D.C. 20549, or by calling the SEC at 1-800-
apparel products are produced outside the United States, while equipment
SEC-0330. In addition, the SEC maintains a website (www.sec.gov) that
products are produced both in the United States and abroad.
contains current, quarterly and annual reports, proxy and information
Products
We focus our NIKE Brand product offerings in nine key categories: Running, designed for sports activities. We also sell small amounts of various plastic
NIKE Basketball, the Jordan Brand, Football (Soccer), Men’s Training, products to other manufacturers through our wholly-owned subsidiary, NIKE
Women’s Training, Action Sports, Sportswear (our sports-inspired lifestyle IHM, Inc.
products) and Golf. Men’s Training includes our baseball and American
Our Jordan Brand designs, distributes and licenses athletic and casual
football product offerings. We also market products designed for kids, as well
footwear, apparel and accessories predominantly focused on basketball
as for other athletic and recreational uses such as cricket, lacrosse, tennis,
using the Jumpman trademark. Sales and operating results for the Jordan
volleyball, wrestling, walking and outdoor activities.
Brand are reported as a separate category and within the NIKE Brand
NIKE’s athletic footwear products are designed primarily for specific athletic geographic operating segments, respectively.
use, although a large percentage of the products are worn for casual or leisure
One of our wholly-owned subsidiary brands, Hurley, headquartered in Costa
purposes. We place considerable emphasis on innovation and high-quality
Mesa, California, designs and distributes a line of action sports and youth
construction in our products. Sportswear, Running, the Jordan Brand and
lifestyle apparel and accessories under the Hurley trademark. Sales and
Football (Soccer) are currently our top-selling footwear categories and we
operating results for Hurley are included within the NIKE Brand Action Sports
expect them to continue to lead in footwear sales.
category and within the NIKE Brand’s North America geographic operating
We also sell sports apparel covering the above-mentioned categories, which segment, respectively.
feature the same trademarks and are sold predominantly through the same
Another of our wholly-owned subsidiary brands, Converse, headquartered in
marketing and distribution channels as athletic footwear. Our sports apparel,
Boston, Massachusetts, designs, distributes and licenses casual sneakers,
similar to our athletic footwear products, is designed primarily for athletic use
apparel and accessories under the Converse, Chuck Taylor, All Star, One
and exemplifies our commitment to innovation and high-quality construction.
Star, Star Chevron and Jack Purcell trademarks. Operating results of the
Sportswear, Men’s Training, Running, Football (Soccer) and Women’s
Converse brand are reported on a stand-alone basis.
Training are currently our top-selling apparel categories, and we expect them
to continue to lead in apparel sales. We often market footwear, apparel and
In addition to the products we sell to our wholesale customers and directly to
accessories in “collections” of similar use or by category. We also market
consumers through our DTC operations, we have also entered into license
apparel with licensed college and professional team and league logos.
agreements that permit unaffiliated parties to manufacture and sell, using
NIKE-owned trademarks, certain apparel, digital devices and applications
We sell a line of performance equipment and accessories under the NIKE
and other equipment designed for sports activities.
Brand name, including bags, socks, sport balls, eyewear, timepieces, digital
devices, bats, gloves, protective equipment, golf clubs and other equipment
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 57
Page#5
PART I
Sales and Marketing
Financial information about geographic and segment operations appears in and adequate manner could have a material adverse effect on our sales and
Note 17 — Operating Segments and Related Information of the profitability. This is a continuing risk. Refer to Item 1A. Risk Factors.
accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
We report our NIKE Brand operations based on our internal geographic
We experience moderate fluctuations in aggregate sales volume during the organization. Each NIKE Brand geography operates predominantly in one
year. Historically, revenues in the first and fourth fiscal quarters have slightly industry: the design, development, marketing and selling of athletic footwear,
exceeded those in the second and third quarters. However, the mix of apparel, equipment, accessories and services. Our reportable operating
product sales may vary considerably as a result of changes in seasonal and segments for the NIKE Brand are: North America, Western Europe, Central &
geographic demand for particular types of footwear, apparel and equipment, Eastern Europe, Greater China, Japan and Emerging Markets. Our NIKE
as well as other macroeconomic, operating and logistics-related factors. Brand Direct to Consumer operations are managed within each geographic
operating segment.
Because NIKE is a consumer products company, the relative popularity of
various sports and fitness activities and changing design trends affect the Converse is also a reportable segment and operates in one industry: the
demand for our products. We must, therefore, respond to trends and shifts in design, marketing, licensing and selling of casual sneakers, apparel and
consumer preferences by adjusting the mix of existing product offerings, accessories. Converse Direct to Consumer operations, including
developing new products, styles and categories and influencing sports and e-commerce, are reported within the Converse operating segment results.
fitness preferences through extensive marketing. Failure to respond in a timely
United States Market
For fiscal 2016, NIKE Brand and Converse sales in the United States that their orders will be delivered within a set time period at a fixed price. In
accounted for approximately 47% of total revenues, compared to 46% for fiscal 2016, 84% of our U.S. wholesale footwear shipments were made under
both fiscal 2015 and fiscal 2014. We sell our NIKE Brand, Jordan Brand, the futures program, compared to 87% in fiscal 2015 and 86% in fiscal 2014.
Hurley and Converse products to thousands of retail accounts in the United In fiscal 2016, 66% of our U.S. wholesale apparel shipments were made
States, including a mix of footwear stores, sporting goods stores, athletic under the futures program, compared to 67% in fiscal 2015 and 71% in fiscal
specialty stores, department stores, skate, tennis and golf shops and other 2014.
retail accounts. In the United States, we utilize NIKE sales offices to solicit
Our Direct to Consumer operations sell NIKE Brand, Jordan Brand, Hurley
sales as well as independent sales representatives to sell specialty products
and Converse products to consumers through our e-commerce website,
for golf and skateboarding. During fiscal 2016, our three largest customers
www.nike.com. In addition, our Direct to Consumer operations sell through
accounted for approximately 25% of sales in the United States.
the following number of retail stores in the United States:
We make substantial use of our futures ordering program, which allows
retailers to order five to six months in advance of delivery with the commitment
U.S. Retail Stores Number
NIKE Brand factory stores 196
NIKE Brand in-line stores, including employee-only stores 34
Converse stores (including factory stores) 103
Hurley stores (including factory and employee stores) 29
TOTAL 362
In the United States, NIKE has five significant distribution centers located in Foothill Ranch, California distribution center. Converse and Hurley products
Memphis, Tennessee, two of which are owned and three are leased. NIKE are shipped primarily from leased facilities in Ontario, California. Smaller
Brand apparel and equipment products are also shipped from our leased leased distribution facilities are located in various parts of the United States.
International Markets
For fiscal 2016, non-U.S. NIKE Brand and Converse sales accounted for 53% many countries and regions, including Canada, Asia, some Latin American
of total revenues, compared to 54% for both fiscal 2015 and fiscal 2014. We countries and Europe, we have a futures ordering program for retailers similar
sell our products to retail accounts, through our own Direct to Consumer to the United States futures ordering program described above. During fiscal
operations and through a mix of independent distributors, licensees and sales 2016, NIKE’s three largest customers outside of the United States accounted
representatives around the world. We sell to thousands of retail accounts and for approximately 13% of total non-U.S. sales.
ship products from 42 distribution centers outside of the United States. In
In addition to NIKE and Converse owned e-commerce websites in over 40 countries, our Direct to Consumer business operates the following number of retail
stores outside the United States:
Non-U.S. Retail Stores Number
NIKE Brand factory stores 588
NIKE Brand in-line stores, including employee-only stores 72
Converse stores (including factory stores) 23
TOTAL 683
58
Page#6
PART I
International branch offices and subsidiaries of NIKE are located in Argentina, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, the Netherlands, Norway, Panama, the
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bermuda, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Croatia, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Russia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hong Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, the
Kong, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Korea, United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom, Uruguay and Vietnam.
Significant Customer
No customer accounted for 10% or more of our worldwide net revenues during fiscal 2016.
Orders
Worldwide futures orders for NIKE Brand athletic footwear and apparel, once orders and the fulfillment of certain of these futures orders may fall
scheduled for delivery from June through November 2016, were $14.9 billion outside of the scheduled time period noted above. In addition, foreign
compared with $13.8 billion for the same period last year. NIKE Brand currency exchange rate fluctuations as well as differing levels of order
reported futures include (1) orders from external wholesale customers and (2) cancellations, discounts and returns can cause differences in the
internal orders from our DTC in-line stores and e-commerce operations which comparisons between futures orders and actual revenues. Moreover, a
are reflected at prices that are comparable to prices charged to external portion of our revenue is not derived from futures orders, including sales of at-
wholesale customers. The U.S. Dollar futures orders amount is calculated once and closeout NIKE Brand footwear and apparel, all sales of NIKE Brand
based upon our internal forecast of the actual currency exchange rates under equipment, the difference between retail sales and internal orders from our
which our revenues will be translated during this period. Reported futures Direct to Consumer in-line stores and e-commerce operations, and sales
orders are not necessarily indicative of our expectation of revenues for this from our Converse, Hurley and NIKE Golf businesses.
period. This is because the mix of orders can shift between futures and at-
Product Research, Design and Development
K
-
We believe our research, design and development efforts are key factors in athletes, athletes engaged under sports marketing contracts and other 0
1
our success. Technical innovation in the design and manufacturing process of athletes wear-test and evaluate products during the design and development
M
footwear, apparel and athletic equipment receive continued emphasis as we process.
strive to produce products that help to enhance athletic performance, reduce R
As we continue to develop new technologies, we are simultaneously focused
O
injury and maximize comfort while reducing waste.
on the design of innovative products incorporating such technologies
F
In addition to our own staff of specialists in the areas of biomechanics, throughout our product categories. Using market intelligence and research,
chemistry, exercise physiology, engineering, industrial design, sustainability our various design teams identify opportunities to leverage new technologies
and related fields, we also utilize research committees and advisory boards in existing categories responding to consumer preferences. The proliferation
made up of athletes, coaches, trainers, equipment managers, orthopedists, of NIKE Air, Lunar, Zoom, Free, Flywire, Dri-Fit, Flyknit, Flyweave and NIKE+
podiatrists and other experts who consult with us and review designs, technologies through Running, NIKE Basketball, the Jordan Brand, Football
materials, concepts for product and manufacturing process improvements (Soccer), Men’s Training, Women’s Training and Sportswear, among others,
and compliance with product safety regulations around the world. Employee typifies our dedication to designing innovative products.
Manufacturing
We are supplied by approximately 142 footwear factories located in 15 The principal materials used in our footwear products are natural and
countries. The largest single footwear factory accounted for approximately synthetic rubber, plastic compounds, foam cushioning materials, natural and
7% of total fiscal 2016 NIKE Brand footwear production. Virtually all of our synthetic leather, nylon, polyester and canvas, as well as polyurethane films
footwear is manufactured outside of the United States by independent used to make NIKE Air-Sole cushioning components. During fiscal 2016,
contract manufacturers who often operate multiple factories. In fiscal 2016, NIKE IHM, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of NIKE, Inc., with facilities near
contract factories in Vietnam, China and Indonesia manufactured Beaverton, Oregon and in St. Charles, Missouri, as well as independent
approximately 44%, 29% and 21% of total NIKE Brand footwear, contractors in China and Vietnam, were our largest suppliers of the Air-Sole
respectively. We also have manufacturing agreements with independent cushioning components used in footwear. The principal materials used in our
factories in Argentina, India, Brazil and Mexico to manufacture footwear for apparel products are natural and synthetic fabrics and threads (both virgin
sale primarily within those countries. In fiscal 2016, five footwear contract and recycled); specialized performance fabrics designed to efficiently wick
manufacturers each accounted for greater than 10% of footwear production moisture away from the body, retain heat and repel rain and/or snow; and
and in aggregate accounted for approximately 69% of NIKE Brand footwear plastic and metal hardware. NIKE’s independent contractors and suppliers
production. buy raw materials for the manufacturing of our footwear, apparel and
equipment products. Most raw materials are available and purchased by
We are supplied by approximately 394 apparel factories located in 39
those independent contractors and suppliers in the countries where
countries. The largest single apparel factory accounted for approximately
manufacturing takes place. NIKE’s independent contract manufacturers and
12% of total fiscal 2016 NIKE Brand apparel production. Virtually all of our
suppliers have thus far experienced little difficulty in satisfying raw material
apparel is manufactured outside of the United States by independent contract
requirements for the production of our products.
manufacturers which often operate multiple factories. In fiscal 2016, contract
factories in China, Vietnam and Indonesia produced approximately 26%, Since 1972, Sojitz Corporation of America (“Sojitz America”), a large
23% and 9% of total NIKE Brand apparel, respectively. In fiscal 2016, one Japanese trading company and the sole owner of our redeemable preferred
apparel contract manufacturer accounted for more than 10% of apparel stock, has performed significant import-export financing services for us.
production, and the top five contract manufacturers in aggregate accounted During fiscal 2016, Sojitz America provided financing and purchasing services
for approximately 39% of NIKE Brand apparel production. for NIKE Brand products sold in certain NIKE markets including Argentina,
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 59
Page#7
PART I
Uruguay, Brazil, Canada, India, South Africa and Thailand, excluding orders that would adversely affect sales and profitability. However, we believe
products produced and sold in the same country. Approximately 6% of NIKE that any such disruption would be short-term in duration due to the ready
Brand sales occurred in those countries. Any failure of Sojitz America to availability of alternative sources of financing at competitive rates. Our current
provide these services or any failure of Sojitz America’s banks could disrupt agreements with Sojitz America expire on May 31, 2018 and contain a
our ability to acquire products from our suppliers and to deliver products to provision allowing us to extend the agreements to May 31, 2019.
our customers in those markets. Such a disruption could result in canceled
International Operations and Trade
Our international operations and sources of supply are subject to the usual footwear, apparel and equipment. Moreover, with respect to trade restrictions
risks of doing business abroad, such as possible increases in import duties, targeting China, which represents an important sourcing country and
anti-dumping measures, quotas, safeguard measures, trade restrictions, consumer market for us, we are working with a broad coalition of global
restrictions on the transfer of funds and, in certain parts of the world, political businesses and trade associations representing a wide variety of sectors to
instability and terrorism. We have not, to date, been materially affected by any help ensure that any legislation enacted and implemented (i) addresses
such risk, but cannot predict the likelihood of such material effects occurring legitimate and core concerns, (ii) is consistent with international trade rules,
in the future. and (iii) reflects and considers China’s domestic economy and the important
role it has in the global economic community.
In recent years, uncertain global and regional economic conditions have
Where trade protection measures are implemented, we believe that we have
affected international trade and caused a rise in protectionist actions around
the ability to develop, over a period of time, adequate alternative sources of
the world. These trends are affecting many global manufacturing and service
supply for the products obtained from our present suppliers. If events
sectors, and the footwear and apparel industries, as a whole, are not immune.
prevented us from acquiring products from our suppliers in a particular
Companies in our industry are facing trade protectionism in many different
country, our operations could be temporarily disrupted and we could
regions, and in nearly all cases we are working together with industry groups
experience an adverse financial impact. However, we believe we could abate
to address trade issues and reduce the impact to the industry, while
any such disruption, and that much of the adverse impact on supply would,
observing applicable competition laws. Notwithstanding our efforts,
therefore, be of a short-term nature, although alternate sources of supply
protectionist measures have resulted in increases in the cost of our products,
might not be as cost-effective and could have an ongoing adverse impact on
and additional measures, if implemented, could adversely affect sales and/or
profitability.
profitability for NIKE as well as the imported footwear and apparel industry as
a whole. NIKE advocates for trade liberalization for footwear and apparel in a number
of regional and bilateral free trade agreements. The Trans-Pacific Partnership
We monitor protectionist trends and developments throughout the world that (TPP), if ultimately ratified, has the potential to reduce or eliminate high rates of
may materially impact our industry, and we engage in administrative and customs duties for imports into the United States of NIKE products sourced
judicial processes to mitigate trade restrictions. We are actively monitoring from TPP countries (primarily footwear and apparel from Vietnam and apparel
actions that may result in additional anti-dumping measures and could affect from Malaysia). Similarly, the European Union has concluded a free trade
our industry. We are also monitoring for and advocating against other agreement with Vietnam that, if approved, could lead to duty reduction or
impediments that may limit or delay customs clearance for imports of elimination for footwear and apparel.
Competition
The athletic footwear, apparel and equipment industry is highly competitive on (cid:129) Consumer connection and affinity for brands and products, developed
a worldwide basis. We compete internationally with a significant number of through marketing and promotion; social media interaction; customer
athletic and leisure footwear companies, athletic and leisure apparel support and service; identification with prominent and influential athletes,
companies, sports equipment companies and large companies having coaches, teams, colleges and sports leagues who endorse our brands and
diversified lines of athletic and leisure footwear, apparel and equipment, use our products and active engagement through sponsored sporting
including adidas, ASICS, Li Ning, lululemon athletica, Puma, V.F. Corporation events and clinics.
and Under Armour, among others. The intense competition and the rapid
(cid:129) Effective sourcing and distribution of products, with attractive
changes in technology and consumer preferences in the markets for athletic
merchandising and presentation at retail, both in-store and online.
and leisure footwear and apparel and athletic equipment, constitute
significant risk factors in our operations.
We believe that we are competitive in all of these areas.
NIKE is the largest seller of athletic footwear, apparel and equipment in the
world. Important aspects of competition in this industry are:
(cid:129) Product attributes such as quality; performance and reliability; new product
innovation and development and consumer price/value.
Trademarks and Patents
We utilize trademarks on nearly all of our products and believe having We have copyright protection in our design, graphics and other original
distinctive marks that are readily identifiable is an important factor in creating a works. When appropriate, we have sought registrations for this content.
market for our goods, in identifying our brands and the Company and in
We own patents and have a patent license, facilitating our use of “Air”
distinguishing our goods from the goods of others. We consider our NIKE and
technologies.
Swoosh Design trademarks to be among our most valuable assets and we
We also file and maintain many U.S. and foreign utility patents, as well as
have registered these trademarks in almost 170 jurisdictions worldwide. In
many U.S. and foreign design patents protecting components,
addition, we own many other trademarks that we utilize in marketing our
manufacturing techniques, features and industrial design used in various
products. We own common law rights in the trade dress of several significant
athletic and leisure footwear and apparel, athletic equipment, digital devices
shoe designs and elements. For certain trade dress, we have sought and
and golf products. These patents expire at various times; patents issued for
obtained trademark registrations.
original applications filed this calendar year in the United States may last until
2031 for design patents and until 2036 for utility patents.
60
Page#8
PART I
We believe our success depends upon our capabilities in areas such as foreign countries on inventions, designs and improvements that we deem
design, research and development, production and marketing rather than valuable. We also continue to vigorously protect our trademarks and patents
exclusively upon our patent and trade secret positions. However, we have against third-party infringement.
followed a policy of filing patent applications for the United States and select
Employees
As of May 31, 2016, we had approximately 70,700 employees worldwide, States, local laws require employee representation by works councils (which
including retail and part-time employees. Management considers its may be entitled to information and consultation on certain Company
relationship with employees to be excellent. None of our employees are decisions) or by organizations similar to a union. In certain European
represented by a union, except for certain employees in the Emerging countries, we are required by local law to enter into and/or comply with
Markets geography, where local law requires those employees to be industry-wide or national collective bargaining agreements. NIKE has never
represented by a trade union. Also, in some countries outside of the United experienced a material interruption of operations due to labor disagreements.
Executive Officers of the Registrant
The executive officers of NIKE, Inc. as of July 15, 2016 are as follows: Jeanne P. Jackson, President & Strategic Advisor — Ms. Jackson,
64, joined NIKE in 2009. She was appointed President & Strategic Advisor in
Mark G. Parker, Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer —
June 2016. She was appointed President, Product and Merchandising in
Mr. Parker, 60, was appointed President and Chief Executive Officer in
2013 and President, Direct to Consumer in 2009. Ms. Jackson also served as
January 2006 and named Chairman of the Board in June 2016. He has been
a member of the NIKE, Inc. Board of Directors from 2001 through 2009. She
employed by NIKE since 1979 with primary responsibilities in product
founded and served as Chief Executive Officer of MSP Capital, a private
K
research, design and development, marketing and brand management.
investment company, from 2002 to 2009. Ms. Jackson was Chief Executive
-
Mr. Parker was appointed divisional Vice President in charge of product
Officer of Walmart.com from March 2000 to January 2002. She was with 0
development in 1987, corporate Vice President in 1989, General Manager in 1
Gap, Inc., as President and Chief Executive Officer of Banana Republic from
1993, Vice President of Global Footwear in 1998 and President of the NIKE M
1995 to 2000, also serving as Chief Executive Officer of Gap, Inc. Direct from
Brand in 2001.
R
1998 to 2000. Since 1978, she has held various retail management positions
O
with Victoria’s Secret, The Walt Disney Company, Saks Fifth Avenue and
Chris L. Abston, Vice President and Corporate Controller — Mr. Abston,
F
Federated Department Stores.
53, joined NIKE in 2015 from Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., where he served as Vice
President, Global Controls and Governance since February 2015. Prior to that
Hilary K. Krane, Executive Vice President, Chief Administrative Officer and
he was Vice President and Controller of Walmart International from February
General Counsel — Ms. Krane, 52, joined NIKE as Vice President and
2013 to January 2015, responsible for the oversight of international
General Counsel in April 2010. In 2011, her responsibilities expanded and she
accounting and reporting, and Vice President and Assistant Controller of Wal-
became Vice President, General Counsel and Corporate Affairs. Ms. Krane
Mart Stores, Inc. from May 2011 to January 2013. Before joining Wal-Mart,
was appointed Executive Vice President, Chief Administrative Officer and
Mr. Abston spent 25 years in public accounting with Ernst & Young LLP, most
General Counsel in 2013. Prior to joining NIKE, Ms. Krane was General
recently leading its Strategic Growth Markets practice as a Partner in the
Counsel and Senior Vice President for Corporate Affairs at Levi Strauss & Co.
Dallas office.
from 2006 to 2010. From 1996 to 2006, she was a partner and assistant
general counsel at PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP.
David J. Ayre, Executive Vice President, Global Human Resources —
Mr. Ayre, 56, joined NIKE as Vice President, Global Human Resources in
John F. Slusher, Executive Vice President, Global Sports Marketing —
2007. Prior to joining NIKE, he held a number of senior human resource
Mr. Slusher, 47, has been employed by NIKE since 1998 with primary
positions with PepsiCo, Inc. since 1990, most recently as head of Talent and
responsibilities in global sports marketing. Mr. Slusher was appointed Director
Performance Rewards.
of Sports Marketing for the Asia Pacific and Americas in 2006, divisional Vice
President of Asia Pacific & Americas Sports Marketing in September 2007
Andrew Campion, Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer —
and Vice President, Global Sports Marketing in November 2007. Prior to
Mr. Campion, 44, joined NIKE in 2007 as Vice President of Global Planning
joining NIKE, Mr. Slusher was an attorney at the law firm of O’Melveny &
and Development, leading strategic and financial planning. He was appointed
Myers from 1995 to 1998.
Chief Financial Officer of the NIKE Brand in 2010, responsible for leading all
aspects of financial management for the Company’s flagship brand. In 2014,
Michael Spillane, President, Product and Merchandising — Mr. Spillane,
he was appointed Senior Vice President, Strategy, Finance and Investor
56, joined NIKE in 2007. He was appointed President, Product and
Relations in addition to his role as Chief Financial Officer of NIKE Brand.
Merchandising in 2016. He has served the Company in various roles including
Mr. Campion assumed the role of Executive Vice President and Chief
Vice President and General Manager of Greater China, Chief Executive Officer
Financial Officer in August 2015. Prior to joining NIKE, he held leadership roles
of Umbro and Converse and most recently as Vice President and General
in strategic planning, mergers and acquisitions, financial planning and
Manager of Footwear. Prior to joining NIKE, Mr. Spillane held leadership roles
analysis, operations and planning, investor relations and tax at The Walt
at Polartec, Maiden Mills Industries, Inc. and Tommy Hilfiger Licensing, LLC.
Disney Company from 1996 to 2007.
Eric D. Sprunk, Chief Operating Officer — Mr. Sprunk, 52, joined NIKE in
Trevor A. Edwards, President, NIKE Brand — Mr. Edwards, 53, joined
1993. He was appointed Finance Director and General Manager of the
NIKE in 1992. He was appointed Marketing Manager, Strategic Accounts for
Americas in 1994, Finance Director for NIKE Europe in 1995, Regional
Foot Locker in 1993, Director of Marketing for the Americas in 1995, Director
General Manager of NIKE Europe Footwear in 1998 and Vice President &
of Marketing for Europe in 1997, Vice President, Marketing for Europe, Middle
General Manager of the Americas in 2000. Mr. Sprunk was appointed Vice
East and Africa in 1999 and Vice President, U.S. Brand Marketing in 2000.
President of Global Footwear in 2001, Vice President of Merchandising and
Mr. Edwards was appointed corporate Vice President, Global Brand
Product in 2009 and Chief Operating Officer in 2013. Prior to joining NIKE,
Management in 2002, Vice President, Global Brand and Category
Mr. Sprunk was a certified public accountant with Price Waterhouse from
Management in 2006 and President, NIKE Brand in 2013. Prior to NIKE,
1987 to 1993.
Mr. Edwards was with the Colgate-Palmolive Company.
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 61
Page#9
PART I
ITEM 1A. Risk Factors
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Investors should also be aware that while NIKE does, from time to time,
communicate with securities analysts, it is against NIKE’s policy to disclose to
Analyst Reports
them any material non-public information or other confidential commercial
Certain written and oral statements, other than purely historic information, information. Accordingly, shareholders should not assume that NIKE agrees
including estimates, projections, statements relating to NIKE’s business with any statement or report issued by any analyst irrespective of the content
plans, objectives and expected operating results and the assumptions upon of the statement or report. Furthermore, NIKE has a policy against issuing or
which those statements are based, made or incorporated by reference from confirming financial forecasts or projections issued by others. Thus, to the
time to time by NIKE or its representatives in this report, other reports, filings extent that reports issued by securities analysts contain any projections,
with the SEC, press releases, conferences or otherwise, are “forward-looking forecasts or opinions, such reports are not the responsibility of NIKE.
statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act
of 1995 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as Our products face intense competition.
amended. Forward-looking statements include, without limitation, any
NIKE is a consumer products company and the relative popularity of various
statement that may predict, forecast, indicate or imply future results,
sports and fitness activities and changing design trends affect the demand for
performance or achievements, and may contain the words “believe,”
our products. The athletic footwear, apparel and equipment industry is highly
“anticipate,” “expect,” “estimate,” “project,” “will be,” “will continue,” “will likely
competitive both in the United States and worldwide. We compete
result” or words or phrases of similar meaning. Forward-looking statements
internationally with a significant number of athletic and leisure footwear
involve risks and uncertainties which may cause actual results to differ
companies, athletic and leisure apparel companies, sports equipment
materially from the forward-looking statements. The risks and uncertainties
companies and large companies having diversified lines of athletic and leisure
are detailed from time to time in reports filed by NIKE with the SEC, including
footwear, apparel and equipment. We also compete with other companies for
reports filed on Forms 8-K, 10-Q and 10-K, and include, among others, the
the production capacity of independent manufacturers that produce our
following: international, national and local general economic and market
products.
conditions; the size and growth of the overall athletic footwear, apparel and
equipment markets; intense competition among designers, marketers,
Product offerings, technologies, marketing expenditures (including
distributors and sellers of athletic footwear, apparel and equipment for
expenditures for advertising and endorsements), pricing, costs of production,
consumers and endorsers; demographic changes; changes in consumer
customer service and social media presence are areas of intense competition.
preferences; popularity of particular designs, categories of products and
This, in addition to rapid changes in technology and consumer preferences in
sports; seasonal and geographic demand for NIKE products; difficulties in
the markets for athletic and leisure footwear and apparel and athletic
anticipating or forecasting changes in consumer preferences, consumer
equipment, constitute significant risk factors in our operations. If we do not
demand for NIKE products and the various market factors described above;
adequately and timely anticipate and respond to our competitors, our costs
difficulties in implementing, operating and maintaining NIKE’s increasingly
may increase or the consumer demand for our products may decline
complex information systems and controls, including, without limitation, the
significantly.
systems related to demand and supply planning and inventory control;
interruptions in data and information technology systems; consumer data
Failure to maintain our reputation and brand image could
security; fluctuations and difficulty in forecasting operating results, including,
negatively impact our business.
without limitation, the fact that advance futures orders may not be indicative of
future revenues due to changes in shipment timing, the changing mix of Our iconic brands have worldwide recognition, and our success depends on
futures and at-once orders, and discounts, order cancellations and returns; our ability to maintain and enhance our brand image and reputation.
the ability of NIKE to sustain, manage or forecast its growth and inventories; Maintaining, promoting and growing our brands will depend on our design
the size, timing and mix of purchases of NIKE’s products; increases in the and marketing efforts, including advertising and consumer campaigns,
cost of materials, labor and energy used to manufacture products; new product innovation and product quality. Our commitment to product
product development and introduction; the ability to secure and protect innovation and quality and our continuing investment in design (including
trademarks, patents and other intellectual property; product performance and materials) and marketing may not have the desired impact on our brand
quality; customer service; adverse publicity; the loss of significant customers image and reputation. We could be adversely impacted if we fail to achieve
or suppliers; dependence on distributors and licensees; business disruptions; any of these objectives or if the reputation or image of any of our brands is
increased costs of freight and transportation to meet delivery deadlines; tarnished or receives negative publicity. In addition, adverse publicity about
increases in borrowing costs due to any decline in NIKE’s debt ratings; regulatory or legal action against us, or by us, could damage our reputation
changes in business strategy or development plans; general risks associated and brand image, undermine consumer confidence in us and reduce long-
with doing business outside the United States, including, without limitation, term demand for our products, even if the regulatory or legal action is
exchange rate fluctuations, import duties, tariffs, quotas, political and unfounded or not material to our operations.
economic instability and terrorism; changes in government regulations; the
In addition, our success in maintaining, extending and expanding our brand
impact of, including business and legal developments relating to, climate
image depends on our ability to adapt to a rapidly changing media
change, natural disasters, liability and other claims asserted against NIKE; the
environment, including our increasing reliance on social media and digital
ability to attract and retain qualified personnel; the effects of NIKE’s decision
dissemination of advertising campaigns. Negative posts or comments about
to invest in or divest of businesses and other factors referenced or
us on social networking websites could seriously damage our reputation and
incorporated by reference in this report and other reports.
brand image. If we do not maintain, extend and expand our brand image,
The risks included here are not exhaustive. Other sections of this report may then our product sales, financial condition and results of operations could be
include additional factors which could adversely affect NIKE’s business and materially and adversely affected.
financial performance. Moreover, NIKE operates in a very competitive and
rapidly changing environment. New risks emerge from time to time and it is If we are unable to anticipate consumer preferences and
not possible for management to predict all such risks, nor can it assess the
develop new products, we may not be able to maintain or
impact of all such risks on NIKE’s business or the extent to which any risk, or
increase our revenues and profits.
combination of risks, may cause actual results to differ materially from those
contained in any forward-looking statements. Given these risks and Our success depends on our ability to identify, originate and define product
uncertainties, investors should not place undue reliance on forward-looking trends as well as to anticipate, gauge and react to changing consumer
statements as a prediction of actual results. demands in a timely manner. However, lead times for many of our products
62
Page#10
PART I
may make it more difficult for us to respond rapidly to new or changing exit from the European Union, commonly referred to as “Brexit.” Our
product trends or consumer preferences. All of our products are subject to international revenues and expenses generally are derived from sales and
changing consumer preferences that cannot be predicted with certainty. Our operations in foreign currencies, and these revenues and expenses could be
new products may not receive consumer acceptance as consumer affected by currency fluctuations, specifically amounts recorded in foreign
preferences could shift rapidly to different types of performance products or currencies and translated into U.S. Dollars for consolidated financial reporting,
away from these types of products altogether, and our future success as weakening of foreign currencies relative to the U.S. Dollar adversely affects
depends in part on our ability to anticipate and respond to these changes. If the U.S. Dollar value of the Company’s foreign currency-denominated sales
we fail to anticipate accurately and respond to trends and shifts in consumer and earnings. Currency exchange rate fluctuations could also disrupt the
preferences by adjusting the mix of existing product offerings, developing new business of the independent manufacturers that produce our products by
products, designs, styles and categories, and influencing sports and fitness making their purchases of raw materials more expensive and more difficult to
preferences through aggressive marketing, we could experience lower sales, finance. Foreign currency fluctuations have adversely affected and could
excess inventories or lower profit margins, any of which could have an continue to have an adverse effect on our results of operations and financial
adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition. In addition, condition.
we market our products globally through a diverse spectrum of advertising
We may hedge certain foreign currency exposures to lessen and delay, but
and promotional programs and campaigns, including social media and online
not to completely eliminate, the effects of foreign currency fluctuations on our
advertising. If we do not successfully market our products or if advertising and
financial results. Since the hedging activities are designed to lessen volatility,
promotional costs increase, these factors could have an adverse effect on our
they not only reduce the negative impact of a stronger U.S. Dollar or other
business, financial condition and results of operations.
trading currency, but they also reduce the positive impact of a weaker U.S.
Dollar or other trading currency. Our future financial results could be
We rely on technical innovation and high-quality products
significantly affected by the value of the U.S. Dollar in relation to the foreign
to compete in the market for our products.
currencies in which we conduct business. The degree to which our financial
results are affected for any given time period will depend in part upon our
Technical innovation and quality control in the design and manufacturing
hedging activities.
process of footwear, apparel and athletic equipment is essential to the
commercial success of our products. Research and development plays a key
Global economic conditions could have a material adverse
role in technical innovation. We rely upon specialists in the fields of
biomechanics, chemistry, exercise physiology, engineering, industrial design, effect on our business, operating results and financial
sustainability and related fields, as well as research committees and advisory condition.
K
boards made up of athletes, coaches, trainers, equipment managers,
-
0
The uncertain state of the global economy continues to impact businesses
orthopedists, podiatrists and other experts to develop and test cutting edge
1
around the world, most acutely in emerging markets and developing
performance products. While we strive to produce products that help to
M
economies. If global economic and financial market conditions do not
enhance athletic performance, reduce injury and maximize comfort, if we fail
R
improve or deteriorate, the following factors could have a material adverse
to introduce technical innovation in our products, consumer demand for our
O
effect on our business, operating results and financial condition:
products could decline, and if we experience problems with the quality of our
F
products, we may incur substantial expense to remedy the problems.
(cid:129) Slower consumer spending may result in reduced demand for our
products, reduced orders from retailers for our products, order
Failure to continue to obtain or maintain high-quality
cancellations, lower revenues, higher discounts, increased inventories and
endorsers of our products could harm our business.
lower gross margins.
We establish relationships with professional athletes, sports teams and
(cid:129) In the future, we may be unable to access financing in the credit and capital
leagues to develop, evaluate and promote our products, as well as establish
markets at reasonable rates in the event we find it desirable to do so.
product authenticity with consumers. However, as competition in our industry
has increased, the costs associated with establishing and retaining such (cid:129) We conduct transactions in various currencies, which increases our
sponsorships and other relationships have increased. If we are unable to exposure to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates relative to the
maintain our current associations with professional athletes, sports teams and U.S. Dollar. Continued volatility in the markets and exchange rates for
leagues, or to do so at a reasonable cost, we could lose the on-field foreign currencies and contracts in foreign currencies could have a
authenticity associated with our products, and we may be required to modify significant impact on our reported operating results and financial condition.
and substantially increase our marketing investments. As a result, our brands,
(cid:129) Continued volatility in the availability and prices for commodities and raw
net revenues, expenses and profitability could be harmed.
materials we use in our products and in our supply chain (such as cotton or
Furthermore, if certain endorsers were to stop using our products contrary to petroleum derivatives) could have a material adverse effect on our costs,
their endorsement agreements, our business could be adversely affected. In gross margins and profitability.
addition, actions taken by athletes, teams or leagues associated with our
(cid:129) If retailers of our products experience declining revenues or experience
products that harm the reputations of those athletes, teams or leagues, could
difficulty obtaining financing in the capital and credit markets to purchase
also seriously harm our brand image with consumers and, as a result, could
our products, this could result in reduced orders for our products, order
have an adverse effect on our sales and financial condition. In addition, poor
cancellations, late retailer payments, extended payment terms, higher
performance by our endorsers, a failure to continue to correctly identify
accounts receivable, reduced cash flows, greater expense associated with
promising athletes to use and endorse our products or a failure to enter into
collection efforts and increased bad debt expense.
cost-effective endorsement arrangements with prominent athletes and sports
organizations could adversely affect our brand, sales and profitability.
(cid:129) If retailers of our products experience severe financial difficulty, some may
become insolvent and cease business operations, which could negatively
Currency exchange rate fluctuations could result in lower
impact the sale of our products to consumers.
revenues, higher costs and decreased margins and
(cid:129) If contract manufacturers of our products or other participants in our supply
earnings.
chain experience difficulty obtaining financing in the capital and credit
markets to purchase raw materials or to finance capital equipment and
A majority of our products are manufactured and sold outside of the United
other general working capital needs, it may result in delays or non-delivery of
States. As a result, we conduct purchase and sale transactions in various
shipments of our products.
currencies, which increases our exposure to fluctuations in foreign currency
exchange rates globally. Additionally, there has been, and may continue to
be, volatility in currency exchange rates as a result of the United Kingdom’s
June 23, 2016 referendum in which voters approved the United Kingdom’s
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 63
Page#11
PART I
Our business is affected by seasonality, which could result We may be adversely affected by the financial health of our
in fluctuations in our operating results. customers.
We extend credit to our customers based on an assessment of a customer’s
We experience moderate fluctuations in aggregate sales volume during the
financial condition, generally without requiring collateral. To assist in the
year. Historically, revenues in the first and fourth fiscal quarters have slightly
scheduling of production and the shipping of seasonal products, we offer
exceeded those in the second and third fiscal quarters. However, the mix of
customers the ability to place orders five to six months ahead of delivery
product sales may vary considerably from time to time as a result of changes
under our futures ordering program. These advance orders may be canceled,
in seasonal and geographic demand for particular types of footwear, apparel
and the risk of cancellation may increase when dealing with financially
and equipment and in connection with the timing of significant sporting
unstable retailers or retailers struggling with economic uncertainty. In the past,
events, including without limitation the Olympics and the European football
some customers have experienced financial difficulties up to and including
championship. In addition, our customers may cancel orders, change delivery
bankruptcies, which have had an adverse effect on our sales, our ability to
schedules or change the mix of products ordered with minimal notice. As a
collect on receivables and our financial condition. When the retail economy
result, we may not be able to accurately predict our quarterly sales.
weakens, retailers may be more cautious with orders. A slowing economy in
Accordingly, our results of operations are likely to fluctuate significantly from
our key markets could adversely affect the financial health of our customers,
period to period. This seasonality, along with other factors that are beyond our
which in turn could have an adverse effect on our results of operations and
control, including general economic conditions, changes in consumer
financial condition. In addition, product sales are dependent in part on high
preferences, weather conditions, availability of import quotas, transportation
quality merchandising and an appealing store environment to attract
disruptions and currency exchange rate fluctuations, could adversely affect
consumers, which requires continuing investments by retailers. Retailers that
our business and cause our results of operations to fluctuate. Our operating
experience financial difficulties may fail to make such investments or delay
margins are also sensitive to a number of additional factors that are beyond
them, resulting in lower sales and orders for our products.
our control, including manufacturing and transportation costs, shifts in
product sales mix and geographic sales trends, all of which we expect to
Consolidation of retailers or concentration of retail market
continue. Results of operations in any period should not be considered
share among a few retailers may increase and concentrate
indicative of the results to be expected for any future period.
our credit risk and impair our ability to sell products.
Futures orders may not be an accurate indication of our
The athletic footwear, apparel and equipment retail markets in some countries
future revenues.
are dominated by a few large athletic footwear, apparel and equipment
retailers with many stores. These retailers have in the past increased their
We make substantial use of our futures ordering program, which allows
market share and may continue to do so in the future by expanding through
retailers to order five to six months in advance of delivery with the commitment
acquisitions and construction of additional stores. These situations
that their orders will be delivered within a set period of time at a fixed price.
concentrate our credit risk with a relatively small number of retailers, and, if
Our futures ordering program allows us to minimize the amount of products
any of these retailers were to experience a shortage of liquidity, it would
we hold in inventory, purchasing costs, the time necessary to fill customer
increase the risk that their outstanding payables to us may not be paid. In
orders and the risk of non-delivery. We report changes in futures orders in our
addition, increasing market share concentration among one or a few retailers
periodic financial reports. Although we believe futures orders are an important
in a particular country or region increases the risk that if any one of them
indicator of our future revenues, reported futures orders are not necessarily
substantially reduces their purchases of our products, we may be unable to
indicative of our expectation of revenues for any future period. This is due to
find a sufficient number of other retail outlets for our products to sustain the
year-over-year changes in shipment timing, changes in the mix of orders
same level of sales and revenues.
between futures and at-once orders and because the fulfillment of certain
orders may fall outside of the schedule noted above. In addition, foreign
Our Direct to Consumer operations have required and will
currency exchange rate fluctuations, as well as differing levels of order
continue to require a substantial investment and
cancellations, discounts and returns can cause differences in the
commitment of resources and are subject to numerous
comparisons between futures orders and actual revenues. Moreover, a
risks and uncertainties.
portion of our revenue is not derived from futures orders, including sales of at-
once and closeout NIKE Brand footwear and apparel, all sales of NIKE Brand
Our Direct to Consumer stores have required substantial fixed investment in
equipment, the difference between retail sales and internal orders from our
equipment and leasehold improvements, information systems, inventory and
Direct to Consumer in-line stores and e-commerce operations, and sales
personnel. We have entered into substantial operating lease commitments for
from Converse, NIKE Golf and Hurley.
retail space. Certain stores have been designed and built to serve as high-
profile venues to promote brand awareness and marketing activities.
Our futures ordering program does not prevent excess
Because of their unique design elements, locations and size, these stores
inventories or inventory shortages, which could result in
require substantially more investment than other stores. Due to the high fixed-
decreased operating margins, reduced cash flows and cost structure associated with our Direct to Consumer operations, a decline in
sales or the closure or poor performance of individual or multiple stores could
harm to our business.
result in significant lease termination costs, write-offs of equipment and
We purchase products from manufacturers outside of our futures ordering leasehold improvements and employee-related costs.
program and in advance of customer orders, which we hold in inventory and
Many factors unique to retail operations, some of which are beyond the
resell to customers. There is a risk we may be unable to sell excess products
Company’s control, pose risks and uncertainties. Risks include, but are not
ordered from manufacturers. Inventory levels in excess of customer demand
limited to: credit card fraud; mismanagement of existing retail channel
may result in inventory write-downs, and the sale of excess inventory at
partners; and inability to manage costs associated with store construction
discounted prices could significantly impair our brand image and have an
and operation. In addition, extreme weather conditions in the areas in which
adverse effect on our operating results, financial condition and cash flows.
our stores are located could adversely affect our business.
Conversely, if we underestimate consumer demand for our products or if our
manufacturers fail to supply products we require at the time we need them,
If the technology-based systems that give our customers
we may experience inventory shortages. Inventory shortages might delay
the ability to shop with us online do not function effectively,
shipments to customers, negatively impact retailer and distributor
our operating results, as well as our ability to grow our
relationships and diminish brand loyalty.
e-commerce business globally, could be materially
The difficulty in forecasting demand also makes it difficult to estimate our
adversely affected.
future results of operations, financial condition and cash flows from period to
period. A failure to accurately predict the level of demand for our products Many of our customers shop with us through our e-commerce website and
could adversely affect our net revenues and net income, and we are unlikely mobile commerce applications. Increasingly, customers are using tablets and
to forecast such effects with any certainty in advance. smart phones to shop online with us and with our competitors and to do
64
Page#12
PART I
comparison shopping. We are increasingly using social media and proprietary design, production processes, quality, packaging, merchandising,
mobile applications to interact with our customers and as a means to distribution, advertising and promotion of our licensed products, we cannot
enhance their shopping experience. Any failure on our part to provide
completely control the use of our licensed brands by our licensees. The
attractive, effective, reliable, user-friendly e-commerce platforms that offer a
misuse of a brand by a licensee could have a material adverse effect on that
wide assortment of merchandise with rapid delivery options and that
brand and on us.
continually meet the changing expectations of online shoppers could place us
at a competitive disadvantage, result in the loss of e-commerce and other
We are subject to data security and privacy risks that could
sales, harm our reputation with customers, have a material adverse impact on
negatively affect our results, operations or reputation.
the growth of our e-commerce business globally and could have a material
adverse impact on our business and results of operations.
In addition to our own sensitive and proprietary business information, we
collect transactional and personal information about our customers and users
Risks specific to our e-commerce business also include diversion of sales
of our digital experiences, which include online distribution channels and
from our and our retailers’ brick and mortar stores, difficulty in recreating the
product engagement and personal fitness applications. Hackers and data
in-store experience through direct channels and liability for online content. Our
thieves are increasingly sophisticated and operate large-scale and complex
failure to successfully respond to these risks might adversely affect sales in
automated attacks. Any breach of our network may result in the loss of
our e-commerce business, as well as damage our reputation and brands.
valuable business data, misappropriation of our consumers’, users’ or
employees’ personal information or a disruption of our business, which could
Failure to adequately protect or enforce our intellectual
give rise to unwanted media attention, materially damage our consumers,
property rights could adversely affect our business.
customer relationships and our reputation and result in lost sales, lost users,
fines, or lawsuits. We also may need to expend significant resources to
We believe that our intellectual property rights are important to our brand, our
protect against, respond to and/or redress problems caused by any breach.
success and our competitive position. We periodically discover products that
are counterfeit reproductions of our products or that otherwise infringe on our
In addition, we must comply with increasingly complex and rigorous
intellectual property rights. If we are unsuccessful in enforcing our intellectual
regulatory standards enacted to protect business and personal data.
property, continued sales of these products could adversely affect our sales
Compliance with existing and proposed laws and regulations can be costly,
and our brand and could result in a shift of consumer preference away from
and any failure to comply with these regulatory standards could subject us to
our products.
legal and reputational risks. Misuse of or failure to secure personal information
could also result in violation of data privacy laws and regulations, proceedings
The actions we take to establish and protect our intellectual property rights
K
against the Company by governmental entities or others, damage to our
may not be adequate to prevent imitation of our products by others or to
-
reputation and credibility and could have a negative impact on revenues and
prevent others from seeking to block sales of our products as violations of 0
profits. 1
proprietary rights.
M
We may be subject to liability if third parties successfully claim that we infringe Failure of our contractors or our licensees’ contractors to
R
on their intellectual property rights. Defending infringement claims could be
comply with our code of conduct, local laws and other O
expensive and time-consuming and might result in our entering into costly
F
standards could harm our business.
license agreements. We also may be subject to significant damages or
injunctions against development, use, importation and/or sale of certain We work with hundreds of contractors outside of the United States to
products. manufacture our products, and we also have license agreements that permit
unaffiliated parties to manufacture or contract for the manufacture of products
We take various actions to prevent the unauthorized use and/or disclosure of
using our intellectual property. We require the contractors that directly
confidential information. Such actions include contractual measures such as
manufacture our products and our licensees that make products using our
entering into non-disclosure and non-compete agreements and providing
intellectual property (including, indirectly, their contract manufacturers) to
confidential information awareness training. Our controls and efforts to
comply with a code of conduct and other environmental, health and safety
prevent unauthorized use and/or disclosure of confidential information might
standards for the benefit of workers. We also require these contractors to
not always be effective. Confidential information that is related to business
comply with applicable standards for product safety. Notwithstanding their
strategy, new technologies, mergers and acquisitions, unpublished financial
contractual obligations, from time to time contractors may not comply with
results or personal data could be prematurely or inadvertently used and/or
such standards or applicable local law or our licensees may fail to enforce
disclosed, resulting in a loss of reputation, a decline in our stock price and/or a
such standards or applicable local law on their contractors. Significant or
negative impact on our market position, and could lead to damages, fines,
continuing noncompliance with such standards and laws by one or more
penalties or injunctions.
contractors could harm our reputation or result in a product recall and, as a
result, could have an adverse effect on our sales and financial condition.
In addition, the laws of certain countries may not protect or allow enforcement
of intellectual property rights to the same extent as the laws of the United
Our international operations involve inherent risks which
States. We may face significant expenses and liability in connection with the
could result in harm to our business.
protection of our intellectual property rights, including outside the United
States, and if we are unable to successfully protect our rights or resolve
Virtually all of our athletic footwear and apparel is manufactured outside of the
intellectual property conflicts with others, our business or financial condition
United States, and the majority of our products are sold outside of the United
may be adversely affected.
States. Accordingly, we are subject to the risks generally associated with
global trade and doing business abroad, which include foreign laws and
We are subject to the risk that our licensees may not
regulations, varying consumer preferences across geographic regions,
generate expected sales or maintain the value of our
political unrest, disruptions or delays in cross-border shipments and changes
brands.
in economic conditions in countries in which our products are manufactured
or where we sell products. This includes, for example, the uncertainty
We currently license, and expect to continue licensing, certain of our
surrounding the implementation and effect of Brexit, including changes to the
proprietary rights, such as trademarks or copyrighted material, to third parties.
legal and regulatory framework that apply to the United Kingdom and its
If our licensees fail to successfully market and sell licensed products, or fail to
relationship with the European Union. In addition, disease outbreaks, terrorist
obtain sufficient capital or effectively manage their business operations,
acts and military conflict have increased the risks of doing business abroad.
customer relationships, labor relationships, supplier relationships or credit
These factors, among others, could affect our ability to manufacture products
risks, it could adversely affect our revenues, both directly from reduced
or procure materials, our ability to import products, our ability to sell products
royalties received and indirectly from reduced sales of our other products.
in international markets and our cost of doing business. If any of these or other
We also rely on our licensees to help preserve the value of our brands. factors make the conduct of business in a particular country undesirable or
Although we attempt to protect our brands through approval rights over the impractical, our business could be adversely affected. In addition, many of our
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 65
Page#13
PART I
imported products are subject to duties, tariffs or quotas that affect the cost bankruptcy proceedings. In the event of default or failure of one or more of our
and quantity of various types of goods imported into the United States and counterparties, we could incur significant losses, which could negatively
other countries. Any country in which our products are produced or sold may impact our results of operations and financial condition.
eliminate, adjust or impose new quotas, duties, tariffs, safeguard measures,
We rely on a concentrated source base of contract
anti-dumping duties, cargo restrictions to prevent terrorism, restrictions on
the transfer of currency, climate change legislation, product safety regulations manufacturers to supply a significant portion of our
or other charges or restrictions, any of which could have an adverse effect on
footwear products.
our results of operations and financial condition.
NIKE is supplied by approximately 142 footwear factories located in 15
We could be subject to changes in tax rates, adoption of countries. We do not own or operate any of our own footwear manufacturing
facilities and depend upon independent contract manufacturers to
new tax laws or additional tax liabilities.
manufacture all of the footwear products we sell. In fiscal 2016, five footwear
We are subject to the tax laws in the United States and numerous foreign
contract manufacturers each accounted for greater than 10% of fiscal 2016
jurisdictions. Current economic and political conditions make tax rules in any
footwear production and in aggregate accounted for approximately 69% of
jurisdiction, including the United States, subject to significant change. There
NIKE Brand footwear production in fiscal 2016. Our ability to meet our
have been proposals to reform U.S. and foreign tax laws that could
customers’ needs depends on our ability to maintain a steady supply of
significantly impact how U.S. multinational corporations are taxed on foreign
products from our independent contract manufacturers. If one or more of our
earnings. Although we cannot predict whether or in what form these
significant suppliers were to sever their relationship with us or significantly alter
proposals will pass, several of the proposals considered, if enacted into law,
the terms of our relationship, we may not be able to obtain replacement
could have an adverse impact on our income tax expense and cash flows.
products in a timely manner, which could have a material adverse effect on
We earn a substantial portion of our income in foreign countries and are
our sales, financial condition or results of operations. Additionally, if any of our
subject to the tax laws of those jurisdictions. If our capital or financing needs in
primary contract manufacturers fail to make timely shipments, do not meet
the United States require us to repatriate earnings from foreign jurisdictions
our quality standards or otherwise fail to deliver us product in accordance with
above our current levels, our effective income tax rates for the affected
our plans, there could be a material adverse effect on our results of
periods could be negatively impacted.
operations.
Portions of our operations are subject to a reduced tax rate or are free of tax
Our products are subject to risks associated with overseas
under various tax holidays and rulings that expire in whole or in part from time
sourcing, manufacturing and financing.
to time. These tax holidays and rulings may be extended when certain
conditions are met, or terminated if certain conditions are not met. If the tax
The principal materials used in our apparel products — natural and synthetic
holidays and rulings are not extended, or if we fail to satisfy the conditions of
fabrics and threads, specialized performance fabrics designed to efficiently
the reduced tax rate, our future effective income tax rate would increase in the
wick moisture away from the body, retain heat or repel rain and/or snow as
future.
well as plastic and metal hardware — are available in countries where our
manufacturing takes place. The principal materials used in our footwear
We are also subject to the examination of our tax returns by the United States
products — natural and synthetic rubber, plastic compounds, foam
Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) and other tax authorities. We regularly assess
cushioning materials, natural and synthetic leather, natural and synthetic
the likelihood of an adverse outcome resulting from these examinations to
fabrics and threads, nylon, canvas and polyurethane films — are also locally
determine the adequacy of its provision for income taxes. Although we believe
available to manufacturers. Both our apparel and footwear products are
our tax provisions are adequate, the final determination of tax audits and any
dependent upon the ability of our unaffiliated contract manufacturers to
related disputes could be materially different from our historical income tax
locate, train, employ and retain adequate personnel. NIKE contractors and
provisions and accruals. The results of audits or related disputes could have
suppliers buy raw materials and are subject to wage rates that are oftentimes
an adverse effect on our financial statements for the period or periods for
regulated by the governments of the countries in which our products are
which the applicable final determinations are made. For example, the IRS has
manufactured.
assessed additional tax liabilities for 2011 and 2012 related to a foreign tax
credit matter. We are currently contesting the matter in U.S. Tax Court. In
There could be a significant disruption in the supply of fabrics or raw materials
addition to the risk of additional tax for these years, if this litigation is adversely
from current sources or, in the event of a disruption, our contract
determined and the IRS was to seek similar adjustments in subsequent years,
manufacturers might not be able to locate alternative suppliers of materials of
we could be subject to significant additional tax liabilities. Additionally, we and
comparable quality at an acceptable price or at all. Further, our unaffiliated
our subsidiaries are engaged in a number of intercompany transactions
contract manufacturers have experienced and may continue to experience in
across multiple tax jurisdictions. Although we believe we have clearly reflected
the future, unexpected increases in work wages, whether government
the economics of these transactions and the proper local transfer pricing
mandated or otherwise and increases in compliance costs due to
documentation is in place, tax authorities may propose and sustain
governmental regulation concerning certain metals used in the manufacturing
adjustments that could result in changes that may impact our mix of earnings
of our products. In addition, we cannot be certain that our unaffiliated
in countries with differing statutory tax rates.
manufacturers will be able to fill our orders in a timely manner. If we
experience significant increases in demand, or reductions in the availability of
If one or more of our counterparty financial institutions
materials, or need to replace an existing manufacturer, there can be no
default on their obligations to us or fail, we may incur
assurance that additional supplies of fabrics or raw materials or additional
significant losses. manufacturing capacity will be available when required on terms that are
acceptable to us, or at all, or that any supplier or manufacturer would allocate
As part of our hedging activities, we enter into transactions involving derivative
sufficient capacity to us in order to meet our requirements. In addition, even if
financial instruments, which may include forward contracts, commodity
we are able to expand existing or find new manufacturing or sources of
futures contracts, option contracts, collars and swaps with various financial
materials, we may encounter delays in production and added costs as a
institutions. In addition, we have significant amounts of cash, cash equivalents
result of the time it takes to train suppliers and manufacturers in our methods,
and other investments on deposit or in accounts with banks or other financial
products, quality control standards and labor, health and safety standards.
institutions in the United States and abroad. As a result, we are exposed to
Any delays, interruption or increased costs in labor or wages, or the supply of
the risk of default by or failure of counterparty financial institutions. The risk of
materials or manufacture of our products could have an adverse effect on our
counterparty default or failure may be heightened during economic
ability to meet retail customer and consumer demand for our products and
downturns and periods of uncertainty in the financial markets. If one of our
result in lower revenues and net income both in the short- and long-term.
counterparties were to become insolvent or file for bankruptcy, our ability to
recover losses incurred as a result of default or our assets that are deposited Because independent manufacturers make a majority of our products outside
or held in accounts with such counterparty may be limited by the of our principal sales markets, our products must be transported by third
counterparty’s liquidity or the applicable laws governing the insolvency or parties over large geographic distances. Delays in the shipment or delivery of
66
Page#14
PART I
our products due to the availability of transportation, work stoppages, port manner, we could experience delays in reporting our financial results, which
strikes, infrastructure congestion or other factors, and costs and delays could result in lost revenues and profits, as well as reputational damage.
associated with consolidating or transitioning between manufacturers, could Furthermore, we depend on information technology systems and personal
adversely impact our financial performance. In addition, manufacturing delays data collection and use for digital marketing, digital commerce, consumer
or unexpected demand for our products may require us to use faster, but engagement and the marketing and use of our digital products and services.
more expensive, transportation methods such as air freight, which could We also rely on our ability to engage in electronic communications throughout
adversely affect our profit margins. The cost of oil is a significant component in the world between and among our employees as well as with other third
manufacturing and transportation costs, so increases in the price of parties, including customers, suppliers, vendors and consumers. Any
petroleum products can adversely affect our profit margins. interruption in our information technology systems may impede our ability to
engage in the digital space and result in lost revenues, damage to our
In addition, Sojitz America performs significant import-export financing
reputation, and loss of users.
services for the Company. During fiscal 2016, Sojitz America provided
financing and purchasing services for NIKE Brand products sold in certain
The market for prime real estate is competitive.
NIKE markets including Argentina, Uruguay, Brazil, Canada, India, South
Our ability to effectively obtain real estate to open new retail stores and
Africa and Thailand (collectively the “Sojitz Markets”), excluding products
otherwise conduct our operations, both domestically and internationally,
produced and sold in the same country. Any failure of Sojitz America to
depends on the availability of real estate that meets our criteria for traffic,
provide these services or any failure of Sojitz America’s banks could disrupt
square footage, co-tenancies, lease economics, demographics and other
our ability to acquire products from our suppliers and to deliver products to
factors. We also must be able to effectively renew our existing real estate
our customers in the Sojitz Markets. Such a disruption could result in
leases. In addition, from time to time, we seek to downsize, consolidate,
canceled orders that would adversely affect sales and profitability.
reposition or close some of our real estate locations, which may require
modification of an existing lease. Failure to secure adequate new locations or
Our success depends on our global distribution facilities.
successfully modify leases for existing locations, or failure to effectively
We distribute our products to customers directly from the factory and through manage the profitability of our existing fleet of retail stores, could have an
distribution centers located throughout the world. Our ability to meet adverse effect on our operating results and financial condition.
customer expectations, manage inventory, complete sales and achieve
Additionally, the economic environment may at times make it difficult to
objectives for operating efficiencies and growth, particularly in emerging
determine the fair market rent of real estate properties domestically and
markets, depends on the proper operation of our distribution facilities, the
K
internationally. This could impact the quality of our decisions to exercise lease
development or expansion of additional distribution capabilities and the timely
-
options at previously negotiated rents and to renew expiring leases at
0
performance of services by third parties (including those involved in shipping
negotiated rents. Any adverse effect on the quality of these decisions could 1
product to and from our distribution facilities). Our distribution facilities could
impact our ability to retain real estate locations adequate to meet our targets M
be interrupted by information technology problems and disasters such as
or efficiently manage the profitability of our existing fleet of stores, which could
R
earthquakes or fires. Any significant failure in our distribution facilities could
have an adverse effect on our operating results and financial condition.
O
result in an adverse effect on our business. We maintain business interruption
F
insurance, but it may not adequately protect us from adverse effects that
Extreme weather conditions and natural disasters could
could be caused by significant disruptions in our distribution facilities.
negatively impact our operating results and financial
condition.
We rely significantly on information technology to operate
our business, including our supply chain and retail
Extreme weather conditions in the areas in which our retail stores, suppliers,
operations, and any failure, inadequacy or interruption of customers, distribution centers and vendors are located could adversely
that technology could harm our ability to effectively affect our operating results and financial condition. Moreover, natural
disasters such as earthquakes, hurricanes and tsunamis, whether occurring
operate our business.
in the United States or abroad, and their related consequences and effects,
We are heavily dependent on information technology systems and networks, including energy shortages and public health issues, could disrupt our
including the Internet and third-party hosted services (“information technology operations, the operations of our vendors and other suppliers or result in
systems”), across our supply chain, including product design, production, economic instability that may negatively impact our operating results and
forecasting, ordering, manufacturing, transportation, sales and distribution, as financial condition.
well as for processing financial information for external and internal reporting
Our financial results may be adversely affected if
purposes, retail operations and other business activities. Our information
technology systems are critical to many of our operating activities and our substantial investments in businesses and operations fail
business processes and may be negatively impacted by any service
to produce expected returns.
interruption or shutdown. For example, our ability to effectively manage and
From time to time, we may invest in technology, business infrastructure, new
maintain our inventory and to ship products to customers on a timely basis
businesses, product offering and manufacturing innovation and expansion of
depends significantly on the reliability of these information technology
existing businesses, such as our retail operations, which require substantial
systems. Over a number of years, we have implemented information
cash investments and management attention. We believe cost-effective
technology systems in all of the geographical regions in which we operate.
investments are essential to business growth and profitability. However,
Our work to integrate, secure and enhance these systems and related
significant investments are subject to typical risks and uncertainties inherent in
processes in our global operations is ongoing and NIKE will continue to invest
developing a new business or expanding an existing business. The failure of
in these efforts. The failure of these systems to operate effectively, including as
any significant investment to provide expected returns or profitability could
a result of security breaches, viruses, hackers or other causes, or our failure to
have a material adverse effect on our financial results and divert management
properly maintain, protect, repair or upgrade our systems, or problems with
attention from more profitable business operations.
transitioning to upgraded or replacement systems could cause delays in
product fulfillment and reduced efficiency of our operations, could require
We are subject to periodic litigation and other regulatory
significant capital investments to remediate the problem and may have an
proceedings, which could result in unexpected expense of
adverse effect on our reputation, results of operations and financial condition.
time and resources.
We also use information technology systems to process financial information
and results of operations for internal reporting purposes and to comply with From time to time we are called upon to defend ourselves against lawsuits
regulatory financial reporting, legal and tax requirements. If our information and regulatory actions relating to our business. Due to the inherent
technology systems suffer severe damage, disruption or shutdown and our uncertainties of litigation and regulatory proceedings, we cannot accurately
business continuity plans do not effectively resolve the issues in a timely predict the ultimate outcome of any such proceedings. An unfavorable
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 67
Page#15
PART I
outcome could have an adverse impact on our business, financial condition in their implementation, our business and operating results could be harmed
and results of operations. In addition, any significant litigation in the future, and we could fail to meet our financial reporting obligations.
regardless of its merits, could divert management’s attention from our
operations and result in substantial legal fees. If our estimates or judgments relating to our critical
accounting policies prove to be incorrect, our operating
We depend on key personnel, the loss of whom would
results could be adversely affected.
harm our business.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting
Our future success will depend in part on the continued service of key
principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires
executive officers and personnel. The loss of the services of any key individual
management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts
could harm our business. Our future success also depends on our ability to
reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes.
recruit, retain and engage our personnel sufficiently, both to maintain our
We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other
current business and to execute our strategic initiatives. Competition for
assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, as
employees in our industry is intense and we may not be successful in
provided in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition
attracting and retaining such personnel.
and Results of Operations.” The results of these estimates form the basis for
making judgments about the carrying values of assets, liabilities and equity,
The sale of a large number of shares of common stock by
and the amount of revenue and expenses that are not readily apparent from
our principal stockholder could depress the market price other sources. Significant assumptions and estimates used in preparing our
of our common stock. consolidated financial statements include those related to revenue
recognition, allowance for uncollectible accounts receivable, inventories,
As of June 30, 2016, Swoosh, LLC beneficially owned more than 78% of our
contingent payments under endorsement contracts, accounting for property,
Class A Common Stock. If, on June 30, 2016, all of these shares were
plant and equipment and definite-lived assets and goodwill and indefinite-
converted into Class B Common Stock, the commensurate ownership
lived intangible assets. Our operating results may be adversely affected if our
percentage of our Class B Common Stock would be approximately 16%. The
assumptions change or if actual circumstances differ from those in our
shares are available for resale, subject to the requirements of the U.S.
assumptions, which could cause our operating results to fall below the
securities laws and the terms of the limited liability company agreement
expectations of securities analysts and investors, resulting in a decline in the
governing Swoosh, LLC. The sale or prospect of a sale of a substantial
price of our Class B Common Stock.
number of these shares could have an adverse effect on the market price of
our common stock. Swoosh, LLC was formed by Philip H. Knight, our
Anti-takeover provisions may impair an acquisition of the
Chairman Emeritus, to hold the majority of his shares of Class A Common
Company or reduce the price of our common stock.
Stock. On June 30, 2016, Mr. Knight sold his voting interest in Swoosh, LLC
to a trust controlled by his son and NIKE director, Travis Knight. There are provisions of our articles of incorporation and Oregon law that are
intended to protect shareholder interests by providing the Board of Directors
Changes in our credit ratings or macroeconomic a means to attempt to deny coercive takeover attempts or to negotiate with a
conditions may affect our liquidity, increasing borrowing potential acquirer in order to obtain more favorable terms. Such provisions
include a control share acquisition statute, a freeze-out statute, two classes of
costs and limiting our financing options.
stock that vote separately on certain issues, and the fact that holders of
Our long-term debt is currently rated Investment Grade by Standard & Poor’s Class A Common Stock elect three-quarters of the Board of Directors
and Moody’s Investors Service. If our credit ratings are lowered, borrowing rounded down to the next whole number. However, such provisions could
costs for future long-term debt or short-term credit facilities may increase and discourage, delay or prevent an unsolicited merger, acquisition or other
our financing options, including our access to the unsecured credit market, change in control of our company that some shareholders might believe to be
could be limited. We may also be subject to restrictive covenants that would in their best interests or in which shareholders might receive a premium for
reduce our flexibility to, among other things, incur additional indebtedness, their common stock over the prevailing market price. These provisions could
make restricted payments, pledge assets as security, make investments, also discourage proxy contests for control of the Company.
loans, advances, guarantees and acquisitions, undergo fundamental
changes and enter into transactions with affiliates. Failure to comply with such We may fail to meet market expectations, which could
covenants could result in a default, and as a result, the commitments of our
cause the price of our stock to decline.
lenders under our credit agreements may be terminated and the maturity of
Our Class B Common Stock is traded publicly, and at any given time various
amounts owed may be accelerated. In addition, macroeconomic conditions,
securities analysts follow our financial results and issue reports on us. These
such as increased volatility or disruption in the credit markets, could adversely
reports include information about our historical financial results as well as
affect our ability to refinance existing debt.
analysts’ estimates of our future performance. Analysts’ estimates are based
If our internal controls are ineffective, our operating results upon their own opinions and are often different from our estimates or
expectations. If our operating results are below the estimates or expectations
could be adversely affected.
of public market analysts and investors, our stock price could decline. In the
Our internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect past, securities class action litigation has been brought against NIKE and
misstatements because of its inherent limitations, including the possibility of other companies following a decline in the market price of their securities. If
human error, the circumvention or overriding of controls or fraud. Even our stock price is volatile, we may become involved in this type of litigation in
effective internal controls can provide only reasonable assurance with respect the future. Any litigation could result in substantial costs and a diversion of
to the preparation and fair presentation of financial statements. If we fail to management’s attention and resources that are needed to successfully run
maintain the adequacy of our internal controls, including any failure to our business.
implement required new or improved controls, or if we experience difficulties
68
Page#16
PART I
ITEM 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments
None.
ITEM 2. Properties
The following is a summary of principal properties owned or leased by NIKE: from our Foothill Ranch, California distribution center, which we lease. Smaller
leased distribution facilities are located in various parts of the United States.
The NIKE World Campus, owned by NIKE and located near Beaverton,
We also own or lease distribution and customer service facilities outside the
Oregon, USA, is a 400-acre site consisting of over 40 buildings which,
United States. The most significant are the distribution facilities located in
together with adjacent leased properties, functions as our world headquarters
Laakdal, Belgium; Taicang, China; Tomisato, Japan and Incheon, Korea, all of
and is occupied by approximately 10,700 employees engaged in
which we own.
management, research, design, development, marketing, finance and other
administrative functions serving nearly all of our divisions. We also lease NIKE IHM, Inc. manufactures Air-Sole cushioning components at NIKE-
various office facilities in the surrounding metropolitan area. We lease a similar, owned facilities located near Beaverton, Oregon and in St. Charles, Missouri.
but smaller, administrative facility in Hilversum, the Netherlands, which serves We also manufacture and sell small amounts of various other plastic products
as the headquarters for the Western Europe and Central & Eastern Europe to other manufacturers through NIKE IHM, Inc.
geographies and management of certain brand functions for our non-U.S.
Aside from the principal properties described above, we lease many offices
operations. We also lease an office complex in Shanghai, China, our
worldwide for sales and administrative purposes. We lease approximately
headquarters for Greater China, occupied by employees focused on
1,044 retail stores worldwide, which consist primarily of factory outlet stores.
implementing our wholesale, DTC and merchandising strategies in the region,
See “United States Market” and “International Markets” in Part I of this Report. K
among other functions. In the United States, NIKE has five significant
-
Our leases expire at various dates through the year 2033.
distribution centers located in Memphis, Tennessee, two of which are owned 0
1
and three are leased. NIKE Brand apparel and equipment are also shipped
M
R
O
F
ITEM 3. Legal Proceedings
There are no material pending legal proceedings, other than ordinary routine litigation incidental to our business, to which we are a party or of which any of our
property is the subject.
ITEM 4. Mine Safety Disclosures
Not applicable.
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 69
Page#17
PART II
PART II
ITEM 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity,
Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer
Purchases of Equity Securities
NIKE’s Class B Common Stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange During the third quarter of fiscal 2016, the Company concluded its four-year,
and trades under the symbol NKE. At July 15, 2016, there were 23,196 $8 billion share repurchase program approved by the Board of Directors in
holders of record of our Class B Common Stock and 16 holders of record of September 2012. Under this program the Company purchased a total of
our Class A Common Stock. These figures do not include beneficial owners 197.1 million shares at a cost of $8 billion (an average price of $40.58 per
who hold shares in nominee name. The Class A Common Stock is not share). Following the completion of this program, the Company began
publicly traded but each share is convertible upon request of the holder into repurchases under the new four-year, $12 billion program approved by the
one share of Class B Common Stock. Refer to Selected Quarterly Financial Board of Directors in November 2015. As of the end of the fourth quarter of
Data in Part II, Item 6 of this Report for information regarding quarterly high fiscal 2016, the Company had repurchased 20.1 million shares at an average
and low sales prices for the Class B Common Stock as reported on the New price of $59.21 per share for a total approximate cost of $1.2 billion under the
York Stock Exchange Composite Tape, and dividends declared on the Class new program. We intend to use excess cash, future cash from operations
A and Class B Common Stock. and/or proceeds from debt to fund repurchases under the share repurchase
program.
The following table presents a summary of share repurchases made by NIKE under these programs during the quarter ended May 31, 2016:
Maximum Number (or Approximate
Dollar Value) of Shares that May
Total Number of Shares Yet Be Purchased Under the
Total Number of Average Price Purchased as Part of Publicly Plans or Programs
Period Shares Purchased Paid per Share Announced Plans or Programs
(In millions)
March 1 — March 31, 2016 2,923,173 $ 61.04 2,923,173 $ 11,173
April 1 — April 30, 2016 4,328,107 $ 59.69 4,328,107 $ 10,914
May 1 — May 31, 2016 1,765,373 $ 58.47 1,765,373 $ 10,811
9,016,653 $ 59.89 9,016,653
70
Page#18
PART II
Performance Graph
The following graph demonstrates a five-year comparison of cumulative total stocks comprising the Standard & Poor’s 500 Stock Index, the Standard &
returns for NIKE’s Class B Common Stock, the Standard & Poor’s 500 Stock Poor’s Apparel, Accessories & Luxury Goods Index and the Dow Jones U.S.
Index, the Standard & Poor’s Apparel, Accessories & Luxury Goods Index Footwear Index. Each of the indices assumes that all dividends were
and the Dow Jones U.S. Footwear Index. The graph assumes an investment reinvested on the day of issuance.
of $100 on May 31, 2011 in each of our Class B Common Stock, and the
COMPARISON OF 5-YEAR CUMULATIVE TOTAL RETURN AMONG NIKE, INC.; S&P 500 INDEX; S&P APPAREL, ACCESSORIES &
LUXURY GOODS INDEX AND THE DOW JONES U.S. FOOTWEAR INDEX
$300
$280
$260
$240
$220
$200
$180
$160
NIKE, Inc.
$140
S&P 500 INDEX - TOTAL RETURNS
$120
DOW JONES US FOOTWEAR INDEX
$100
S&P 500 APPAREL, ACCESSORIES & LUXURY GOODS INDEX
$80
$60
$40
$20
$0 K
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
-
0
1
The Dow Jones U.S. Footwear Index consists of NIKE, Deckers Outdoor The stock performance shown on the performance graph above is not
M
Corp., Wolverine World Wide, Inc., Skechers U.S.A., Inc. and Steven necessarily indicative of future performance. The Company will not make or
R
Madden, Ltd., among other companies. Because NIKE is part of the Dow endorse any predictions as to future stock performance.
O
Jones U.S. Footwear Index, the price and returns of NIKE stock have a
F
The performance graph above is being furnished solely to accompany this
substantial effect on this index. The Standard & Poor’s Apparel,
Report pursuant to Item 201(e) of Regulation S-K, and is not being filed for
Accessories & Luxury Goods Index consists of V.F. Corporation, Coach, Inc.,
purposes of Section 18 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended,
Ralph Lauren Corporation, Under Armour, Inc. and Michael Kors Holdings,
and is not to be incorporated by reference into any filing of the Company,
Limited, among other companies. The Dow Jones U.S. Footwear Index and
whether made before or after the date hereof, regardless of any general
the Standard & Poor’s Apparel, Accessories & Luxury Goods Index include
incorporation language in such filing.
companies in two major lines of business in which the Company competes.
The indices do not encompass all of the Company’s competitors, nor all
product categories and lines of business in which the Company is engaged.
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 71
Page#19
PART II
ITEM 6. Selected Financial Data
Unless otherwise indicated, the following disclosures reflect the Company’s continuing operations. All share and per share amounts are reflective of the two-for-
one stock splits that began trading at split-adjusted prices on December 24, 2015 and December 26, 2012.
Financial History
2016 2015 2014 2013 2012
(In millions, except per share data and financial ratios)
Year Ended May 31,
Revenues $ 32,376 $ 30,601 $ 27,799 $ 25,313 $ 23,331
Gross profit 14,971 14,067 12,446 11,034 10,148
Gross margin % 46.2% 46.0% 44.8% 43.6% 43.5%
Net income from continuing operations 3,760 3,273 2,693 2,451 2,257
Net income (loss) from discontinued operations — — — 21 (46)
Net income 3,760 3,273 2,693 2,472 2,211
Earnings per common share from continuing operations:
Basic 2.21 1.90 1.52 1.37 1.23
Diluted 2.16 1.85 1.49 1.34 1.20
Earnings per common share from discontinued operations:
Basic — — — 0.01 (0.03)
Diluted — — — 0.01 (0.02)
Weighted average common shares outstanding 1,697.9 1,723.5 1,766.7 1,794.6 1,839.9
Diluted weighted average common shares outstanding 1,742.5 1,768.8 1,811.6 1,832.9 1,879.2
Cash dividends declared per common share 0.62 0.54 0.47 0.41 0.35
Cash flow from operations, inclusive of discontinued
operations 3,096 4,680 3,013 3,032 1,932
Price range of common stock:
High 68.19 52.75 40.13 32.96 28.60
Low 47.25 36.57 29.56 21.95 19.65
At May 31,
Cash and equivalents $ 3,138 $ 3,852 $ 2,220 $ 3,337 $ 2,254
Short-term investments 2,319 2,072 2,922 2,628 1,503
Inventories 4,838 4,337 3,947 3,484 3,251
Working capital, excluding assets and liabilities of
discontinued operations(1)(2)(3) 9,667 9,255 8,319 9,391 7,271
Total assets, excluding assets of discontinued
operations(1)(2) 21,396 21,597 18,587 17,540 14,800
Long-term debt 2,010 1,079 1,199 1,210 228
Capital lease obligations(4) 15 5 74 81 —
Redeemable preferred stock 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3
Shareholders’ equity 12,258 12,707 10,824 11,081 10,319
Year-end stock price 55.22 50.84 38.46 30.83 27.05
Market capitalization 92,867 87,044 66,921 55,124 49,546
Financial Ratios:
Return on equity 30.1% 27.8% 24.6% 23.1% 22.0%
Return on assets(1) 17.5% 16.3% 14.9% 15.3% 15.1%
Inventory turns 3.8 4.0 4.1 4.2 4.5
Current ratio at May 31(1) 2.8 2.5 2.7 3.4 3.0
Price/Earnings ratio at May 31 25.6 27.5 25.9 22.8 23.0
(1) Prior year amounts have been updated to reflect the adoption of Accounting Standards Update No. 2015-17, which requires all deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities to be
classified as non-current. Refer to Recently Adopted Accounting Standards in Note 1 — Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the accompanying Notes to the Consolidated
Financial Statements.
(2) Assets of discontinued operations were $0 million, $0 million, $0 million, $0 million and $615 million for the years ended May 31, 2016, 2015, 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively.
(3) Liabilities of discontinued operations were $0 million, $0 million, $0 million, $18 million and $170 million for the years ended May 31, 2016, 2015, 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively.
(4) During the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015, the Company restructured the terms of certain capital leases, which subsequently qualified as operating leases.
72
Page#20
PART II
Selected Quarterly Financial Data
1st Quarter 2nd Quarter 3rd Quarter 4th Quarter
(Unaudited)
2016 2015 2016 2015 2016 2015 2016 2015
(In millions, except per share data)
Revenues $ 8,414 $ 7,982 $ 7,686 $ 7,380 $ 8,032 $ 7,460 $ 8,244 $ 7,779
Gross profit 3,995 3,721 3,501 3,327 3,689 3,426 3,786 3,593
Gross margin % 47.5% 46.6% 45.6% 45.1% 45.9% 45.9% 45.9% 46.2%
Net income 1,179 962 785 655 950 791 846 865
Earnings per common share:
Basic 0.69 0.56 0.46 0.38 0.56 0.46 0.50 0.50
Diluted 0.67 0.54 0.45 0.37 0.55 0.45 0.49 0.49
Weighted average common shares
outstanding 1,709.0 1,729.8 1,706.5 1,726.2 1,693.8 1,722.9 1,682.4 1,715.0
Diluted weighted average common shares
outstanding 1,754.5 1,772.4 1,751.4 1,769.6 1,737.3 1,767.7 1,723.1 1,759.6
Cash dividends declared per common
share 0.14 0.12 0.16 0.14 0.16 0.14 0.16 0.14
Price range of common stock:
High 58.86 40.15 67.65 49.88 68.19 49.75 65.44 52.75
Low 47.25 36.57 54.01 39.18 53.64 43.35 55.17 47.59
K
-
0
1
M
R
O
F
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 73
Page#21
PART II
ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations
NIKE designs, develops, markets and sells athletic footwear, apparel, inclusive of both continuing and discontinued operations, have grown 8% and
equipment, accessories and services worldwide. We are the largest seller of 13%, respectively, on an annual compounded basis. We expanded gross
athletic footwear and apparel in the world. We sell our products to retail margin by approximately 220 basis points and our return on invested capital
accounts, through NIKE-owned in-line and factory retail stores and NIKE- has increased from 22.6% to 29.7%.
owned internet websites (which we refer to collectively as our “Direct to
On November 19, 2015, we announced a two-for-one stock split of both
Consumer” or “DTC” operations) and through a mix of independent
NIKE Class A and Class B Common Stock. The stock split was in the form of
distributors, licensees and sales representatives in virtually all countries
a 100 percent stock dividend payable on December 23, 2015 to shareholders
around the world. Our goal is to deliver value to our shareholders by building a
of record at the close of business on December 9, 2015. Common stock
profitable global portfolio of branded footwear, apparel, equipment and
began trading at the split-adjusted price on December 24, 2015. All share and
accessories businesses. Our strategy is to achieve long-term revenue growth
per share amounts presented reflect the stock split.
by creating innovative, “must have” products, building deep personal
consumer connections with our brands and delivering compelling consumer
Our fiscal 2016 results demonstrated the power of the NIKE, Inc. portfolio to
experiences at retail and online.
deliver continued growth and expanding profitability. Despite significant
foreign currency headwinds, we achieved record revenues and earnings per
In addition to achieving long-term, sustainable revenue growth, we continue
share for fiscal 2016. NIKE, Inc. Revenues grew 6% to $32.4 billion, gross
to strive to deliver shareholder value by driving operational excellence in
margin expanded 20 basis points, Net income increased 15% and diluted
several key areas:
earnings per common share grew 17% to $2.16. We also delivered strong
(cid:129) Expanding gross margin by: cash returns to shareholders while investing for long-term growth.
– Delivering innovative, premium products that command higher prices Earnings before interest and income taxes (“EBIT”) increased 10% for fiscal
while maintaining a balanced price-to-value equation for consumers; 2016, driven by revenue growth and gross margin expansion, while selling
and administrative expense was flat as a percent of revenues. The increase in
– Reducing product costs through a continued focus on manufacturing
revenues was attributable to growth for nearly every NIKE Brand geography
efficiency, product design and innovation;
and across most key categories and product types. This broad-based growth
was primarily fueled by:
– Making our supply chain a competitive advantage by investing in new
technologies that increase automation, help reduce waste and have long-
(cid:129) Innovative performance and sportswear products, incorporating proprietary
term potential to increase both customization of our products and speed
technology platforms such as NIKE Air, Free, Zoom, Lunar, Flywire, Dri-Fit
to market; and
and Flyknit;
– Driving growth in our higher gross margin DTC business, led by
(cid:129) Deep brand connections with consumers through our category offense,
NIKE.com, as part of an integrated marketplace growth strategy across
reinforced by investments in endorsements by high-profile athletes, sports
our DTC and wholesale operations.
teams and leagues, high-impact marketing around global sporting events
and digital marketing; and
(cid:129) Optimizing selling and administrative expense by focusing on:
(cid:129) Strong category retail presentation online and at NIKE-owned and retail
– Investments in consumer engagement that drive economic returns in the
partner stores.
form of incremental revenue and gross profit;
Converse revenues and EBIT decreased 1% and 6%, respectively, as growth
– Infrastructure investments that improve the efficiency and effectiveness of
in direct distribution markets was more than offset by the negative impact of
our operations; and
changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
– Investments in key areas of future growth, including our DTC business.
Gross margin increased primarily due to higher full-price average selling price
(cid:129) Managing working capital efficiency; and and the favorable impact of growth in our higher-margin DTC businesses,
partially offset by higher product costs, primarily due to shifts in mix to higher-
(cid:129) Deploying capital effectively.
cost products and labor input cost inflation, higher off-price mix and
unfavorable changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Through execution of this strategy, our long-term financial goals through fiscal
2020, on average per year, are as follows:
For fiscal 2016, the growth in Net income was positively affected by a year-
over-year decrease in our effective tax rate of 350 basis points primarily due to
(cid:129) High single-digit to low-double digit revenue growth;
an increase in the proportion of earnings from operations outside the United
(cid:129) Mid-teens earnings per share growth;
States, which are generally subject to a lower tax rate. Diluted earnings per
common share grew at a higher rate than Net income due to a 1% decrease
(cid:129) High-twenties to low-thirties percentage rate of return on invested capital;
in the weighted average diluted common shares outstanding, driven by our
(cid:129) Free cash flow growing faster than net income; and share repurchase program.
(cid:129) Sustainable, profitable, long-term growth through effective management of While foreign currency markets remain volatile, we continue to see
our diversified portfolio of businesses. opportunities to drive future growth and profitability, and remain committed to
effectively managing our business to achieve our financial goals over the long-
Over the past ten years, we have achieved many of our financial goals. During
term by executing against the operational strategies outlined above.
this time, revenues and diluted earnings per common share for NIKE, Inc.,
74
Page#22
PART II
Results of Operations
Fiscal 2016 Fiscal 2015 % Change Fiscal 2014 % Change
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
Revenues $ 32,376 $ 30,601 6% $ 27,799 10%
Cost of sales 17,405 16,534 5% 15,353 8%
Gross profit 14,971 14,067 6% 12,446 13%
Gross margin % 46.2% 46.0% 44.8%
Demand creation expense 3,278 3,213 2% 3,031 6%
Operating overhead expense 7,191 6,679 8% 5,735 16%
Total selling and administrative expense 10,469 9,892 6% 8,766 13%
% of Revenues 32.3% 32.3% 31.5%
Interest expense (income), net 19 28 — 33 —
Other (income) expense, net (140) (58) — 103 —
Income before income taxes 4,623 4,205 10% 3,544 19%
Income tax expense 863 932 -7% 851 10%
Effective tax rate 18.7% 22.2% 24.0%
Net income $ 3,760 $ 3,273 15% $ 2,693 22%
Diluted earnings per common share $ 2.16 $ 1.85 17% $ 1.49 24%
K
-
0
1
M
R
O
F
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 75
Page#23
PART II
Consolidated Operating Results
Revenues
% Change % Change
Excluding Excluding
Currency Currency
(Dollars in millions) Fiscal 2016 Fiscal 2015(1) % Change Changes(2) Fiscal 2014(1) % Change Changes(2)
NIKE, Inc. Revenues:
NIKE Brand Revenues by:
Footwear $ 19,871 $ 18,318 8% 15% $ 16,208 13% 17%
Apparel 9,067 8,637 5% 11% 8,109 7% 10%
Equipment 1,496 1,631 -8% -2% 1,670 -2% 1%
Global Brand Divisions(3) 73 115 -37% -30% 125 -8% -2%
Total NIKE Brand Revenues 30,507 28,701 6% 13% 26,112 10% 14%
Converse 1,955 1,982 -1% 2% 1,684 18% 21%
Corporate(4) (86) (82) — — 3 — —
TOTAL NIKE, INC. REVENUES $ 32,376 $ 30,601 6% 12% $ 27,799 10% 14%
Supplemental NIKE Brand Revenues
Details:
NIKE Brand Revenues by:
Sales to Wholesale Customers $ 22,577 $ 21,952 3% 9% $ 20,683 6% 10%
Sales Direct to Consumer 7,857 6,634 18% 25% 5,304 25% 29%
Global Brand Divisions(3) 73 115 -37% -30% 125 -8% -2%
TOTAL NIKE BRAND REVENUES $ 30,507 $ 28,701 6% 13% $ 26,112 10% 14%
NIKE Brand Revenues on a Wholesale
Equivalent Basis:(5)
Sales to Wholesale Customers $ 22,577 $ 21,952 3% 9% $ 20,683 6% 10%
Sales from our Wholesale Operations to Direct to
Consumer Operations 4,672 3,881 20% 27% 3,107 25% 29%
TOTAL NIKE BRAND WHOLESALE
EQUIVALENT REVENUES $ 27,249 $ 25,833 5% 12% $ 23,790 9% 13%
NIKE Brand Wholesale Equivalent
Revenues by:(5)
Men’s $ 15,410 $ 14,689 5% 11% $ 13,996 5% 9%
Women’s 6,296 5,732 10% 17% 4,976 15% 20%
Young Athletes’ 4,560 4,301 6% 11% 3,737 15% 19%
Others(6) 983 1,111 -12% -4% 1,081 3% 7%
TOTAL NIKE BRAND WHOLESALE
EQUIVALENT REVENUES $ 27,249 $ 25,833 5% 12% $ 23,790 9% 13%
NIKE Brand Wholesale Equivalent
Revenues by:(5)
Running $ 5,017 $ 4,863 3% 10% $ 4,626 5% 9%
NIKE Basketball 1,378 1,385 -1% 2% 1,178 18% 19%
Jordan Brand 2,753 2,329 18% 21% 1,941 20% 22%
Football (Soccer) 2,143 2,250 -5% 7% 2,414 -7% -2%
Men’s Training 2,611 2,545 3% 6% 2,485 2% 4%
Women’s Training 1,344 1,281 5% 11% 1,145 12% 16%
Action Sports 711 737 -4% 3% 738 0% 4%
Sportswear 7,513 6,604 14% 22% 5,744 15% 20%
Golf 706 769 -8% -6% 788 -2% 0%
Others(7) 3,073 3,070 0% 6% 2,731 12% 17%
TOTAL NIKE BRAND WHOLESALE
EQUIVALENT REVENUES $ 27,249 $ 25,833 5% 12% $ 23,790 9% 13%
(1) Certain prior year amounts have been reclassified to conform to fiscal 2016 presentation. These changes had no impact on previously reported results of operations or shareholders’
equity.
(2) Results have been restated using actual exchange rates in use during the comparative prior year period to enhance the visibility of the underlying business trends by excluding the impact of
translation arising from foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations.
(3) Global Brand Divisions revenues are primarily attributable to NIKE Brand licensing businesses that are not part of a geographic operating segment.
(4) Corporate revenues primarily consist of foreign currency hedge gains and losses related to revenues generated by entities within the NIKE Brand geographic operating segments and
Converse but managed through our central foreign exchange risk management program.
(5) References to NIKE Brand wholesale equivalent revenues are intended to provide context as to the total size of our NIKE Brand market footprint if we had no Direct to Consumer
operations. NIKE Brand wholesale equivalent revenues consist of (1) sales to external wholesale customers and (2) internal sales from our wholesale operations to our Direct to Consumer
operations which are charged at prices that are comparable to prices charged to external wholesale customers.
(6) Others include all unisex products, equipment and other products not allocated to Men’s, Women’s and Young Athletes’, as well as certain adjustments that are not allocated to products
designated by gender or age.
(7) Others include all other categories and certain adjustments that are not allocated at the category level.
76
Page#24
PART II
Fiscal 2016 Compared to Fiscal 2015 Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014
On a currency-neutral basis, NIKE, Inc. Revenues grew 12% for fiscal 2016, On a currency-neutral basis, revenues from NIKE, Inc. continuing operations
primarily driven by higher revenues for the NIKE Brand. Every NIKE Brand grew 14% for fiscal 2015, driven by increases in revenues for both the NIKE
geography grew revenues for fiscal 2016 as our category offense continued Brand and Converse. Every NIKE Brand geography delivered higher revenues
to deliver innovative products, deep brand connections and compelling retail for fiscal 2015 as our category offense continued to deliver innovative
experiences to consumers online and at NIKE-owned and retail partner products, deep brand connections and compelling retail experiences to
stores, driving strong demand for NIKE Brand products. North America consumers. North America contributed 5 percentage points of the increase in
contributed approximately 4 percentage points of the increase in NIKE, Inc. NIKE, Inc. revenues, while Western Europe contributed 4 percentage points,
revenues, while Greater China and Western Europe each contributed Greater China contributed 2 percentage points and Central & Eastern Europe,
approximately 3 percentage points, Emerging Markets contributed Emerging Markets and Converse each contributed 1 percentage point.
approximately 2 percentage points and Central & Eastern Europe contributed
Excluding the effects of changes in currency exchange rates, NIKE Brand
approximately 1 percentage point.
footwear and apparel revenues increased 17% and 10%, respectively, while
Excluding the effects of changes in currency exchange rates, NIKE Brand NIKE Brand equipment revenues increased 1% during fiscal 2015. The
footwear and apparel revenues increased 15% and 11%, respectively, for increase in NIKE Brand footwear revenues for fiscal 2015 was driven by
fiscal 2016, while NIKE Brand equipment revenues decreased 2%. The strong performance in Sportswear, the Jordan Brand, Running, NIKE
increase in NIKE Brand footwear revenues for fiscal 2016 was driven by Basketball and Football (Soccer). Footwear unit sales in fiscal 2015 increased
growth in nearly every key category, including strong growth in Sportswear, 9%. Higher ASP per pair contributed approximately 8 percentage points of
the Jordan Brand and Running. Footwear unit sales for fiscal 2016 increased footwear revenue growth, driven primarily by higher full-price ASP, and to a
9%, with higher average selling price (ASP) per pair contributing lesser extent, the favorable impact of growth in our higher-priced DTC
approximately 6 percentage points of footwear revenue growth. Higher ASP business.
per pair was driven by higher full-price ASP, and to a lesser extent, the
The constant-currency increase in NIKE Brand apparel revenues for fiscal
favorable impact of an increase in the proportion of revenues from our higher-
2015 was driven by growth in most key categories, led by Sportswear,
priced DTC business.
Running and Women’s Training, which were partially offset by a decline in
The constant-currency increase in NIKE Brand apparel revenues for fiscal Football (Soccer) due largely to the comparison to significant sales of replica
2016 was attributable to growth in most key categories, led by Sportswear, apparel in advance of the World Cup in 2014. Fiscal 2015 unit sales of apparel
K
Men’s Training, Running, Women’s Training and Football (Soccer). Apparel increased 8% with higher ASP per unit contributing approximately 2
-
unit sales for fiscal 2016 increased 7%. Higher ASP per unit contributed percentage points of apparel revenue growth, driven primarily by growth in
0
approximately 4 percentage points of apparel revenue growth, primarily due our higher-priced DTC business. 1
to higher full-price ASP and growth in our higher-priced DTC business. M
For fiscal 2015, DTC revenues represented approximately 23% of our total
R
While wholesale revenues remain the largest component of overall NIKE NIKE Brand revenues compared to 20% in fiscal 2014. On a currency-neutral
O
Brand revenues, we continue to expand our DTC businesses in each of our basis, DTC revenues grew 29% for fiscal 2015, driven by strong comparable
F
geographies. NIKE Brand DTC operations include NIKE-owned in-line and store sales growth of 16%, significant online sales growth and the addition of
factory stores, as well as online sales through NIKE-owned websites. For new stores. Online sales through NIKE-owned websites grew 59% in fiscal
fiscal 2016, DTC revenues represented approximately 26% of our total NIKE 2015. Online sales represented approximately 18% of our total NIKE Brand
Brand revenues. On a currency-neutral basis, DTC revenues increased 25% DTC revenues for fiscal 2015 compared to 15% for fiscal 2014.
for fiscal 2016, driven by strong online sales growth, the addition of new
On a wholesale equivalent basis and excluding the effects of changes in
stores and comparable store sales growth of 10%. Comparable store sales
currency exchange rates, fiscal 2015 NIKE Brand Men’s revenues increased
include revenues from NIKE-owned in-line and factory stores for which all
9%, driven by growth in our Sportswear, the Jordan Brand, NIKE Basketball
three of the following requirements have been met: (1) the store has been
and Running categories. Women’s revenues accelerated in fiscal 2015,
open at least one year, (2) square footage has not changed by more than
achieving 20% growth primarily due to increases in Sportswear, Running and
15% within the past year and (3) the store has not been permanently
Women’s Training categories. Revenues in our Young Athletes’ business
repositioned within the past year. Online sales through NIKE-owned websites,
increased 19% as a result of continued efforts to expand footwear and
which are not included in comparable store sales, grew 51% in fiscal 2016.
apparel offerings for this group across multiple categories, particularly the
For fiscal 2016, online sales represented approximately 22% of our total NIKE
Jordan Brand.
Brand DTC revenues.
On a wholesale equivalent basis and excluding the effects of changes in
currency exchange rates, fiscal 2016 NIKE Brand Men’s revenues increased Futures Orders
11%, driven by growth in Sportswear and the Jordan Brand, while Women’s
Futures orders for NIKE Brand footwear and apparel scheduled for delivery
revenues increased 17%, led by Sportswear, Running and Women’s
from June through November 2016 totaled $14.9 billion and were 8% higher
Training. Revenues for our Young Athletes’ business increased 11%, with
than the orders reported for the comparable prior year period. NIKE Brand
growth across multiple categories, most notably the Jordan Brand.
reported futures include (1) orders from external wholesale customers and (2)
internal orders from our DTC in-line stores and e-commerce operations which
are reflected at prices that are comparable to prices charged to external
wholesale customers. The U.S. Dollar futures orders amount is calculated
based upon our internal forecast of the currency exchange rates under which
our revenues will be translated during this period. Excluding the impact of
currency changes, futures orders increased 11%, with unit orders increasing
4% and average selling price per unit contributing approximately 7
percentage points of growth.
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 77
Page#25
PART II
By geography, futures orders growth was as follows:
Reported Futures Futures Orders Excluding
Orders Currency Changes(1)
North America 6% 6%
Western Europe 8% 11%
Central & Eastern Europe 3% 7%
Greater China 19% 24%
Japan 24% 15%
Emerging Markets 3% 13%
TOTAL NIKE BRAND FUTURES ORDERS 8% 11%
(1) Reported futures have been restated using prior year exchange rates for the comparative period to enhance the visibility of the underlying business trends, excluding the impact of foreign
currency exchange rate fluctuations.
The reported futures orders growth is not necessarily indicative of our returns can cause differences in the comparisons between futures orders and
expectation of revenue growth during this period. This is due to year-over- actual revenues. Moreover, a portion of our revenue is not derived from
year changes in shipment timing, changes in the mix of orders between futures orders, including sales of at-once and closeout NIKE Brand footwear
futures and at-once orders, and because the fulfillment of certain orders may and apparel, all sales of NIKE Brand equipment, the difference between retail
fall outside of the schedule noted above. In addition, exchange rate sales and internal orders from our DTC in-line stores and e-commerce
fluctuations as well as differing levels of order cancellations, discounts and operations, and sales from Converse, NIKE Golf and Hurley.
Gross Margin
Fiscal 2016 Fiscal 2015 % Change Fiscal 2014 % Change
(Dollars in millions)
Gross profit $ 14,971 $ 14,067 6% $ 12,446 13%
Gross margin % 46.2% 46.0% 20 bps 44.8% 120 bps
Fiscal 2016 Compared to Fiscal 2015 Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014
For fiscal 2016, our consolidated gross margin was 20 basis points higher For fiscal 2015, our consolidated gross margin was 120 basis points higher
than fiscal 2015, primarily attributable to the following factors: than fiscal 2014, primarily driven by the following factors:
(cid:129) Higher NIKE Brand full-price ASP (increasing gross margin approximately (cid:129) Higher NIKE Brand full-price ASP (increasing gross margin approximately
190 basis points) aligned with our strategy to deliver innovative, premium 250 basis points) primarily attributable to shifts in mix to higher-priced
products with higher prices and, to a lesser extent, due to price increases products and, to a lesser extent, price increases in response to inflationary
reflecting inflationary conditions in certain territories; conditions in certain territories;
(cid:129) Growth in our higher-margin DTC business (increasing gross margin (cid:129) Higher NIKE Brand product costs (decreasing gross margin approximately
approximately 20 basis points); 190 basis points) largely due to shifts in mix to higher-cost products, labor
input cost inflation and higher air freight costs, in part to mitigate the
(cid:129) Higher NIKE Brand product costs (decreasing gross margin approximately
negative impacts from product delays due to the West Coast port
70 basis points) as shifts in mix to higher-cost products and labor input cost
congestion in the United States;
inflation were only partially offset by lower material input costs;
(cid:129) Growth in our higher-margin DTC business (increasing gross margin
(cid:129) Higher off-price mix (decreasing gross margin approximately 30 basis
approximately 40 basis points); and
points), primarily reflecting the impacts from clearing excess inventory in
North America; (cid:129) Changes in foreign currency exchange rates (including gains and losses on
hedge transactions) increased gross margin approximately 20 basis points.
(cid:129) Unfavorable changes in foreign currency exchange rates, net of hedges
(decreasing gross margin approximately 40 basis points);
(cid:129) Higher other costs (decreasing gross margin approximately 20 basis
points), primarily due to higher product design and development costs; and
(cid:129) Lower gross margin from Converse (decreasing gross margin
approximately 20 basis points), primarily resulting from shifts in mix to lower-
margin products.
Total Selling and Administrative Expense
Fiscal 2016 Fiscal 2015 % Change Fiscal 2014 % Change
(Dollars in millions)
Demand creation expense(1) $ 3,278 $ 3,213 2% $ 3,031 6%
Operating overhead expense 7,191 6,679 8% 5,735 16%
Total selling and administrative expense $ 10,469 $ 9,892 6% $ 8,766 13%
% of Revenues 32.3% 32.3% — bps 31.5% 80 bps
(1) Demand creation expense consists of advertising and promotion costs, including costs of endorsement contracts, television, digital and print advertising, brand events and retail brand
presentation.
78
Page#26
PART II
Fiscal 2016 Compared to Fiscal 2015 Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014
Demand creation expense increased 2% for fiscal 2016 compared to fiscal Demand creation expense increased 6% for fiscal 2015 compared to the prior
2015, primarily due to investments in digital brand marketing, including for our year, primarily due to support for key brand and consumer events, including
DTC business, as well as support for key brand events and initiatives, and the World Cup in early fiscal 2015, increased digital brand marketing,
sports marketing investments, partially offset by lower advertising expense. investments in DTC marketing and higher sports marketing expense.
For fiscal 2016, changes in foreign currency exchange rates decreased Changes in foreign currency exchange rates decreased growth in Demand
growth in Demand creation expense by approximately 6 percentage points. creation expense by approximately 4 percentage points for fiscal 2015.
Operating overhead expense increased 8% compared to fiscal 2015, Operating overhead expense increased 16% compared to the prior year,
primarily as a result of continued investments in our DTC business, including primarily driven by investments in our rapidly growing DTC business, including
new store openings and higher variable expenses, as well as targeted new store openings and higher variable expenses, investments in operational
investments in operational infrastructure and consumer-focused digital infrastructure and consumer-focused digital capabilities and higher
capabilities, partially offset by lower performance-based compensation. performance-based compensation. For fiscal 2015, changes in foreign
Changes in foreign currency exchange rates decreased growth in Operating currency exchange rates decreased growth in Operating overhead expense
overhead expense by approximately 4 percentage points for fiscal 2016. by approximately 3 percentage points.
Other (Income) Expense, Net
Fiscal 2016 Fiscal 2015 Fiscal 2014
(In millions)
Other (income) expense, net $ (140) $ (58) $ 103
Other (income) expense, net comprises foreign currency conversion gains (income) expense, net had an unfavorable impact on our Income before
and losses from the re-measurement of monetary assets and liabilities income taxes of $423 million for fiscal 2016.
denominated in non-functional currencies and the impact of certain foreign
currency derivative instruments, as well as unusual or non-operating
transactions that are outside the normal course of business. Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014
K
Other (income) expense, net shifted from $103 million of other expense, net -
0
for fiscal 2014 to $58 million of other income, net for fiscal 2015, primarily
Fiscal 2016 Compared to Fiscal 2015 1
driven by a $147 million net change in foreign currency conversion gains and
M
Other (income) expense, net increased from $58 million of other income, net losses, primarily due to significant hedge gains from available-for-sale
R
for fiscal 2015 to $140 million of other income, net for fiscal 2016, driven by a investments, as well as an adverse legal judgment in the prior year related to a
O
$26 million net change in foreign currency conversion gains and losses, a long outstanding bankruptcy case for a former customer in Western Europe.
F
favorable settlement of a legal judgment related to a bankruptcy case in
We estimate the combination of the translation of foreign currency-
Western Europe and net gains from other non-operating items.
denominated profits from our international business and the year-over-year
We estimate the combination of the translation of foreign currency- change in foreign currency-related gains and losses included in Other
denominated profits from our international business and the year-over-year (income) expense, net had an unfavorable impact on our Income before
change in foreign currency-related gains and losses included in Other income taxes of $73 million for fiscal 2015.
Income Taxes
Fiscal 2016 Fiscal 2015 % Change Fiscal 2014 % Change
Effective tax rate 18.7% 22.2% (350) bps 24.0% (180) bps
Fiscal 2016 Compared to Fiscal 2015 Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014
The 350 basis point decrease in our effective tax rate for the fiscal year was The 180 basis point decrease in our effective tax rate for the fiscal year was
primarily due to an increase in the proportion of earnings from operations primarily due to the favorable resolution of audits in several jurisdictions.
outside the United States, which are generally subject to a lower tax rate.
Operating Segments
Our operating segments are evidence of the structure of the Company’s As part of our centrally managed foreign exchange risk management
internal organization. The NIKE Brand segments are defined by geographic program, standard foreign currency rates are assigned twice per year to each
regions for operations participating in NIKE Brand sales activity. NIKE Brand entity in our geographic operating segments and Converse.
These rates are set approximately nine and twelve months in advance of the
Each NIKE Brand geographic segment operates predominantly in one
future selling seasons to which they relate (specifically, for each currency, one
industry: the design, development, marketing and selling of athletic footwear,
standard rate applies to the fall and holiday selling seasons and one standard
apparel and equipment. The Company’s reportable operating segments for
rate applies to the spring and summer selling seasons) based on average
the NIKE Brand are: North America, Western Europe, Central & Eastern
market spot rates in the calendar month preceding the date they are
Europe, Greater China, Japan and Emerging Markets, and include results for
established. Inventories and Cost of sales for geographic operating segments
the NIKE, Jordan and Hurley brands. The Company’s NIKE Brand DTC
and Converse reflect use of these standard rates to record non-functional
operations are managed within each geographic operating segment.
currency product purchases into the entity’s functional currency. Differences
Converse is also a reportable segment for the Company and operates in one
between assigned standard foreign currency rates and actual market rates
industry: the design, marketing, licensing and selling of casual sneakers,
are included in Corporate together with foreign currency hedge gains and
apparel and accessories.
losses generated from our centrally managed foreign exchange risk
management program and other conversion gains and losses.
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 79
Page#27
PART II
The breakdown of revenues is as follows:
% Change % Change
Excluding Excluding
Currency Currency
(Dollars in millions) Fiscal 2016 Fiscal 2015(1) % Change Changes(2) Fiscal 2014(1) % Change Changes(2)
North America $ 14,764 $ 13,740 7% 8% $ 12,299 12% 12%
Western Europe 5,884 5,705 3% 14% 4,979 15% 21%
Central & Eastern Europe 1,431 1,421 1% 17% 1,387 2% 15%
Greater China 3,785 3,067 23% 27% 2,602 18% 19%
Japan 869 755 15% 22% 771 -2% 9%
Emerging Markets 3,701 3,898 -5% 13% 3,949 -1% 8%
Global Brand Divisions(3) 73 115 -37% -30% 125 -8% -2%
Total NIKE Brand Revenues 30,507 28,701 6% 13% 26,112 10% 14%
Converse 1,955 1,982 -1% 2% 1,684 18% 21%
Corporate(4) (86) (82) — — 3 — —
TOTAL NIKE, INC. REVENUES $ 32,376 $ 30,601 6% 12% $ 27,799 10% 14%
(1) Certain prior year amounts have been reclassified to conform to fiscal 2016 presentation. These changes had no impact on previously reported results of operations or shareholders’
equity.
(2) Results have been restated using actual exchange rates in use during the comparative prior year period to enhance the visibility of the underlying business trends by excluding the impact of
translation arising from foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations.
(3) Global Brand Divisions revenues are primarily attributable to NIKE Brand licensing businesses that are not part of a geographic operating segment.
(4) Corporate revenues primarily consist of foreign currency hedge gains and losses related to revenues generated by entities within the NIKE Brand geographic operating segments and
Converse, but managed through our central foreign exchange risk management program.
The primary financial measure used by the Company to evaluate performance Statements of Income. As discussed in Note 17 — Operating Segments and
of individual operating segments is earnings before interest and taxes Related Information in the accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial
(commonly referred to as “EBIT”), which represents Net income before Statements, certain corporate costs are not included in EBIT of our operating
Interest expense (income), net and Income tax expense in the Consolidated segments.
The breakdown of earnings before interest and taxes is as follows:
(Dollars in millions) Fiscal 2016 Fiscal 2015(1) % Change Fiscal 2014(1) % Change
North America $ 3,763 $ 3,645 3% $ 3,077 18%
Western Europe 1,434 1,275 12% 855 49%
Central & Eastern Europe 289 249 16% 279 -11%
Greater China 1,372 993 38% 816 22%
Japan 174 100 74% 131 -24%
Emerging Markets 892 818 9% 952 -14%
Global Brand Divisions (2,596) (2,267) -15% (1,993) -14%
Total NIKE Brand 5,328 4,813 11% 4,117 17%
Converse 487 517 -6% 496 4%
Corporate (1,173) (1,097) -7% (1,036) -6%
TOTAL CONSOLIDATED EARNINGS
BEFORE INTEREST AND TAXES 4,642 4,233 10% 3,577 18%
Interest expense (income), net 19 28 — 33 —
TOTAL CONSOLIDATED INCOME
BEFORE INCOME TAXES $ 4,623 $ 4,205 10% $ 3,544 19%
(1) Certain prior year amounts have been reclassified to conform to fiscal 2016 presentation. These changes had no impact on previously reported results of operations or shareholders’ equity.
80
Page#28
PART II
North America
% Change % Change
Excluding Excluding
Currency Currency
Fiscal 2016 Fiscal 2015 % Change Changes Fiscal 2014 % Change Changes
(Dollars in millions)
Revenues by:
Footwear $ 9,299 $ 8,506 9% 10% $ 7,495 13% 14%
Apparel 4,746 4,410 8% 8% 3,937 12% 12%
Equipment 719 824 -13% -13% 867 -5% -5%
TOTAL REVENUES $ 14,764 $ 13,740 7% 8% $ 12,299 12% 12%
Revenues by:
Sales to Wholesale Customers $ 10,674 $ 10,243 4% 5% $ 9,296 10% 10%
Sales Direct to Consumer 4,090 3,497 17% 17% 3,003 16% 17%
TOTAL REVENUES $ 14,764 $ 13,740 7% 8% $ 12,299 12% 12%
EARNINGS BEFORE INTEREST AND TAXES $ 3,763 $ 3,645 3% $ 3,077 18%
Fiscal 2016 Compared to Fiscal 2015 Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014
Excluding changes in foreign currency exchange rates, North America North America revenues increased 12%, despite congestion at ports on the
revenues increased 8% primarily due to growth in our Sportswear, Jordan West Coast of the United States in the second half of the fiscal year, which
Brand and Running categories. DTC revenues grew 17% for fiscal 2016, affected the Company’s supply chain and flow of product to customers.
fueled by strong online sales growth, the addition of new stores and Revenue growth was driven by nearly all key categories for fiscal 2015, led by
comparable store sales growth of 6%. the Jordan Brand, Sportswear, Men’s Training, NIKE Basketball and
Women’s Training. On a constant currency basis, DTC revenue grew 17% for
Currency-neutral footwear revenue growth was attributable to higher K
fiscal 2015, fueled by comparable store sales growth of 8%, strong online
revenues in most key categories, led by the Jordan Brand, Sportswear, -
sales growth and the addition of new stores. 0
Running and Women’s Training, partially offset by a slight decline in NIKE
1
Basketball. Fiscal 2016 unit sales of footwear increased 8%. Higher average Footwear revenue growth was driven by increases in most key categories,
M
selling price (ASP) per pair contributed approximately 2 percentage points of notably the Jordan Brand, NIKE Basketball and Sportswear. Unit sales of
R
footwear revenue growth, driven by higher full-price ASP and the favorable footwear for fiscal 2015 increased 6%, while higher ASP per pair contributed
O
impact of an increase in the proportion of revenues from our higher-priced approximately 8 percentage points of footwear revenue growth, primarily due
F
DTC business, partially offset by higher off-price mix. to higher full-price ASP.
Apparel revenue growth for fiscal 2016 was primarily driven by our Apparel revenue growth was attributable to strong demand in most key
Sportswear and Men’s Training categories. For fiscal 2016, unit sales of categories, led by Sportswear, Men’s Training, Women’s Training and
apparel grew 7%. Higher ASP per unit contributed approximately 1 Running, partially offset by slight declines in Football (Soccer) and Action
percentage point of apparel revenue growth, primarily attributable to higher Sports. For fiscal 2015, unit sales of apparel increased 9%. Higher ASP per
full-price ASP. unit contributed approximately 3 percentage points of apparel revenue
growth, driven primarily by higher full-price ASP and the favorable impact of
Reported EBIT increased 3% for fiscal 2016 as higher revenues were largely
growth in our higher-priced DTC business.
offset by lower gross margin and higher selling and administrative expense as
a percent of revenues. Gross margin declined 80 basis points as higher off- EBIT grew 18% for fiscal 2015 as a result of higher revenues, gross margin
price mix, higher warehousing and inventory obsolescence costs, as well as expansion and selling and administrative expense leverage. Gross margin
higher product input costs more than offset higher full-price ASP. Selling and increased 110 basis points due to higher full-price ASP, improved off-price
administrative expense increased as a percent of revenues as higher product margins and lower inventory obsolescence costs, partially offset by
operating overhead to support our growing DTC operations and bad debt higher product input and logistics costs. Selling and administrative expense
expense related to customer bankruptcies was only partially offset by lower decreased as a percent of revenues despite higher demand creation expense
performance-based compensation. Demand creation also grew at a faster to support key brand and sporting events and higher sports marketing
rate than revenues due to higher spending for sports marketing, DTC expense. Operating overhead costs also increased to support DTC growth
marketing and key brand events and initiatives, partially offset by lower and investments in infrastructure, as well as higher performance-based
advertising expense. compensation costs.
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 81
Page#29
PART II
Western Europe
% Change % Change
Excluding Excluding
Currency Currency
Fiscal 2016 Fiscal 2015 % Change Changes Fiscal 2014 % Change Changes
(Dollars in millions)
Revenues by:
Footwear $ 3,985 $ 3,876 3% 14% $ 3,299 17% 25%
Apparel 1,628 1,552 5% 16% 1,427 9% 14%
Equipment 271 277 -2% 8% 253 9% 15%
TOTAL REVENUES $ 5,884 $ 5,705 3% 14% $ 4,979 15% 21%
Revenues by:
Sales to Wholesale Customers $ 4,429 $ 4,451 0% 10% $ 4,022 11% 17%
Sales Direct to Consumer 1,455 1,254 16% 28% 957 31% 40%
TOTAL REVENUES $ 5,884 $ 5,705 3% 14% $ 4,979 15% 21%
EARNINGS BEFORE INTEREST AND TAXES $ 1,434 $ 1,275 12% $ 855 49%
Fiscal 2016 Compared to Fiscal 2015 higher operating overhead, primarily to support DTC expansion. Demand
creation increased slightly as higher spending for DTC and other demand
Excluding changes in currency exchange rates, Western Europe revenues for creation costs more than offset lower sports marketing costs.
fiscal 2016 increased 14% with double-digit growth in every territory. Growth
was led by our largest territories, the UK & Ireland and AGS (Austria, Germany
and Switzerland), which grew 12% and 16%, respectively. On a category Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014
basis, revenues grew for every key category, most notably Sportswear,
Football (Soccer) and the Jordan Brand. DTC revenues grew 28% for fiscal Excluding the changes in currency exchange rates, revenues for fiscal 2015
2016, due to strong online sales growth, the addition of new stores and increased 21% and grew in every territory, led by AGS and the UK & Ireland,
comparable store sales growth of 13%. our largest territories in Western Europe, which grew 27% and 20%,
respectively. Revenues grew for every key category, most notably Sportswear
Currency-neutral footwear revenue growth was fueled by increases in most
and Running. DTC revenues grew 40%, driven by comparable store sales
key categories, led by Sportswear and the Jordan Brand. For fiscal 2016, unit
growth of 24%, strong online sales growth and the addition of new stores.
sales of footwear increased 10%. Higher ASP per pair contributed
approximately 4 percentage points of footwear revenue growth, driven by The constant currency footwear revenue growth was driven by increases in
higher full-price ASP and the favorable impact of an increase in the proportion nearly every category, most notably Sportswear, Running and Football
of revenues from our higher-priced DTC business, partially offset by higher (Soccer). For fiscal 2015, unit sales of footwear increased 20%. Higher ASP
off-price mix. per pair contributed approximately 5 percentage points of footwear revenue
growth, driven equally by higher full-price ASP and the favorable impact of
The constant currency apparel revenue growth was attributable to increases
growth in our higher-priced DTC business.
in every key category, most notably Sportswear, with Football (Soccer) also
providing strong growth. Unit sales of apparel for fiscal 2016 increased 11%. The constant currency apparel revenue growth was attributable to increases
Higher ASP per unit contributed approximately 5 percentage points of in nearly all key categories, led by Sportswear, Women’s Training and
apparel revenue growth, primarily driven by the favorable impact of an Running, partially offset by a slight decline in Football (Soccer) primarily due to
increase in the proportion of revenues from our higher-priced DTC business the impact of World Cup in fiscal 2014. Unit sales of apparel in fiscal 2015
and higher full-price ASP. increased 14% while ASP per unit was flat.
On a reported basis, EBIT grew 12% for fiscal 2016, despite the negative Despite the negative translation impact from changes in foreign currency
translation impact from changes in foreign currency exchange rates, most exchange rates, most notably the Euro, reported EBIT grew 49% for fiscal
notably the Euro. EBIT grew at a higher rate than revenue as selling and 2015 as a result of strong revenue growth, gross margin expansion and
administrative expense leverage and the favorable settlement of a legal selling and administrative expense leverage. Gross margin increased 190
judgment related to a bankruptcy case reflected in Other (income) expense, basis points, primarily due to favorable standard foreign currency exchange
net, were only partially offset by lower gross margin. Gross margin declined rates and higher full-price ASP, which were only partially offset by higher
10 basis points as unfavorable standard foreign currency exchange rates and product costs. Selling and administrative expense decreased as a percent of
higher off-price mix were mostly offset by higher full-price ASP, shifts in mix to revenues despite increases in operating overhead, primarily as a result of
lower-cost products and growth in our higher-margin DTC business. Selling higher costs to support our growing DTC business. Demand creation
and administrative expense was lower as a percent of revenues despite increased largely as a result of higher sports marketing and digital demand
creation costs.
82
Page#30
PART II
Central & Eastern Europe
% Change % Change
Excluding Excluding
Currency Currency
Fiscal 2016 Fiscal 2015 % Change Changes Fiscal 2014 % Change Changes
(Dollars in millions)
Revenues by:
Footwear $ 882 $ 827 7% 23% $ 763 8% 22%
Apparel 463 499 -7% 9% 532 -6% 5%
Equipment 86 95 -9% 7% 92 3% 14%
TOTAL REVENUES $ 1,431 $ 1,421 1% 17% $ 1,387 2% 15%
Revenues by:
Sales to Wholesale Customers $ 1,215 $ 1,241 -2% 13% $ 1,245 0% 11%
Sales Direct to Consumer 216 180 20% 46% 142 27% 48%
TOTAL REVENUES $ 1,431 $ 1,421 1% 17% $ 1,387 2% 15%
EARNINGS BEFORE INTEREST AND TAXES $ 289 $ 249 16% $ 279 -11%
Fiscal 2016 Compared to Fiscal 2015 Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014
On a currency neutral basis, fiscal 2016 revenues for Central & Eastern Excluding changes in currency exchange rates, Central & Eastern Europe
Europe increased 17%, with double-digit growth in nearly every territory. revenues for fiscal 2015 grew 15%, attributable to increases in most
Revenue growth was led by two of our largest territories, Turkey and Russia, territories. Turkey grew 23% and our distributors business grew 18%, while
which increased 26% and 18%, respectively, while our distributors business revenues declined in Israel, our smallest territory. On a category basis,
also grew 16%. Revenues grew in nearly every key category, driven by revenue growth was driven by increases in most key categories, primarily
Sportswear, Running and Football (Soccer). DTC revenues increased 46%, Sportswear and Running. DTC revenues increased 48%, driven by strong
K
fueled by comparable store sales growth of 27% and the addition of new comparable store sales growth of 28%, the addition of new stores and online
-
stores. sales growth. 0
1
Constant currency footwear revenue growth in fiscal 2016 was driven by The constant currency growth in footwear revenue in fiscal 2015 was driven
M
growth in nearly every key category, led by Sportswear and Running. Fiscal by growth in nearly all key categories, most notably Sportswear and Running.
R
2016 unit sales of footwear increased 7%. Higher ASP per pair contributed Fiscal 2015 unit sales of footwear increased 11%. Higher ASP per pair
O
approximately 16 percentage points of footwear revenue growth, primarily contributed approximately 11 percentage points of footwear revenue growth,
F
driven by higher full-price ASP, largely reflecting inflationary conditions in driven by higher full-price ASP, primarily reflecting inflationary conditions in
certain territories. certain territories.
The currency-neutral growth in apparel revenue in fiscal 2016 was attributable The constant currency growth in apparel revenue in fiscal 2015 resulted from
to growth in nearly all key categories, most notably Football (Soccer) and growth in most key categories, led by Sportswear and Running, partially offset
Running. Unit sales of apparel decreased 2% for fiscal 2016. Higher ASP per by a decline in Football (Soccer) due to comparison to strong sales related to
unit contributed approximately 11 percentage points of apparel revenue the World Cup in fiscal 2014. Unit sales of apparel increased 1% for fiscal
growth, primarily driven by higher full-price ASP, largely reflecting inflationary 2015. Higher ASP per unit contributed approximately 4 percentage points of
conditions in certain territories. apparel revenue growth, primarily due to higher full-price ASP reflecting
inflationary conditions in certain territories.
On a reported basis, EBIT increased 16% for fiscal 2016, despite the negative
impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, primarily the Russian On a reported basis, EBIT declined 11% for fiscal 2015, primarily reflecting the
Ruble and Turkish Lira. EBIT grew faster than reported revenues due to impact of weakening foreign currency exchange rates. Reported revenue
significant gross margin expansion and selling and administrative expense increases and slight selling and administrative expense leverage were more
leverage. Gross margin increased 140 basis points as significantly higher full- than offset by lower gross margin. Gross margin decreased 340 basis points
price ASP, warehousing efficiencies and the favorable impact of a higher as higher product costs and unfavorable standard foreign currency exchange
proportion of revenues from our higher-margin DTC business more than rates were only partially offset by higher full-price ASP. Selling and
offset unfavorable standard foreign currency exchange rates and shifts in mix administrative expense decreased as a percent of revenue despite increases
to higher-cost products. Selling and administrative expense decreased as a in both demand creation and operating overhead. Operating overhead
percent of revenues despite higher operating overhead to support DTC increased primarily as a result of investments in our growing DTC business,
expansion and higher demand creation expense due to increased sports while demand creation increased as a result of higher sports marketing costs.
marketing costs and spending to support brand events.
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 83
Page#31
PART II
Greater China
% Change % Change
Excluding Excluding
Currency Currency
Fiscal 2016 Fiscal 2015 % Change Changes Fiscal 2014 % Change Changes
(Dollars in millions)
Revenues by:
Footwear $ 2,599 $ 2,016 29% 33% $ 1,600 26% 28%
Apparel 1,055 925 14% 17% 876 6% 7%
Equipment 131 126 4% 7% 126 0% 1%
TOTAL REVENUES $ 3,785 $ 3,067 23% 27% $ 2,602 18% 19%
Revenues by:
Sales to Wholesale Customers $ 2,623 $ 2,234 17% 21% $ 2,041 9% 11%
Sales Direct to Consumer 1,162 833 39% 44% 561 48% 51%
TOTAL REVENUES $ 3,785 $ 3,067 23% 27% $ 2,602 18% 19%
EARNINGS BEFORE INTEREST AND TAXES $ 1,372 $ 993 38% $ 816 22%
Fiscal 2016 Compared to Fiscal 2015 Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014
On a currency-neutral basis, Greater China revenues for fiscal 2016 increased Excluding changes in currency exchange rates, Greater China revenue
27%, driven by higher revenues in nearly every key category, led by growth for fiscal 2015 was driven by higher revenues in our Sportswear,
Sportswear, Running, NIKE Basketball and the Jordan Brand. DTC revenues Running, NIKE Basketball and Jordan Brand categories, partially offset by
increased 44%, driven by significant online sales growth, the addition of new small declines in other categories. Strong growth in DTC revenues reflected a
stores and comparable store sales growth of 19%. 28% increase in comparable store sales, strong online sales growth and the
addition of new stores.
The constant currency increase in footwear revenue for fiscal 2016 was driven
by growth in nearly every key category, most notably Sportswear, Running, Constant currency footwear revenue growth in fiscal 2015 was driven by
NIKE Basketball and the Jordan Brand. For fiscal 2016, unit sales of footwear increased sales in our Sportswear, Running, NIKE Basketball and Jordan
increased 27%. Higher ASP per pair contributed approximately 6 percentage Brand categories, partially offset by small declines in other categories. Unit
points of footwear revenue growth, driven by higher full-price ASP and the sales of footwear increased 20% for fiscal 2015. Higher ASP per pair
favorable impact of an increase in the proportion of revenues from our higher- contributed approximately 8 percentage points of footwear revenue growth,
priced DTC business. primarily due to an increase in the proportion of revenues from our higher-
priced DTC business.
Constant currency apparel revenue growth for fiscal 2016 was attributable to
higher revenues in nearly every key category, led by Running and Sportswear. Constant currency apparel revenue growth in fiscal 2015 was driven by
Unit sales of apparel increased 17% for fiscal 2016 while ASP per unit was increases in the Sportswear, Running, Jordan Brand and NIKE Basketball
flat. categories, partially offset by decreases in other categories, primarily Football
(Soccer) and Men’s Training. For fiscal 2015, unit sales of apparel increased
On a reported basis, EBIT increased 38% for fiscal 2016 due to strong
8%. Changes in ASP per unit reduced apparel revenues by approximately 1
revenue growth, gross margin expansion and selling and administrative
percentage point, due primarily to lower full-price ASP, partially offset by
expense leverage. Gross margin increased 80 basis points due to higher full-
increased revenues from our higher-priced DTC business.
price ASP and an increase in the proportion of revenues from our higher-
margin DTC business, partially offset by shifts in mix to higher-cost products On a reported basis, EBIT increased 22% for fiscal 2015 as higher revenues
and unfavorable standard foreign currency exchange rates. Selling and and gross margin expansion more than offset higher selling and administrative
administrative expense decreased as a percent of revenues despite higher expense. Gross margin increased 270 basis points primarily due to higher full-
operating overhead and demand creation expense. Operating overhead price ASP on footwear and an increase in the proportion of revenues from our
increased largely due to support for our growing DTC operations, while higher-margin DTC business, partially offset by higher product costs. Selling
demand creation was also higher, primarily due to retail brand presentation and administrative expense increased due to higher operating overhead to
costs to re-profile category and consumer-focused retail stores as well as support growth initiatives, primarily related to our DTC operations, as well as
spending for key brand events. higher demand creation spending, primarily for sports marketing.
84
Page#32
PART II
Japan
% Change % Change
Excluding Excluding
Currency Currency
Fiscal 2016 Fiscal 2015 % Change Changes Fiscal 2014 % Change Changes
(Dollars in millions)
Revenues by:
Footwear $ 570 $ 452 26% 34% $ 409 11% 23%
Apparel 228 230 -1% 5% 276 -17% -8%
Equipment 71 73 -3% 3% 86 -15% -6%
TOTAL REVENUES $ 869 $ 755 15% 22% $ 771 -2% 9%
Revenues by:
Sales to Wholesale Customers $ 587 $ 536 10% 16% $ 597 -10% 0%
Sales Direct to Consumer 282 219 29% 37% 174 26% 40%
TOTAL REVENUES $ 869 $ 755 15% 22% $ 771 -2% 9%
EARNINGS BEFORE INTEREST AND TAXES $ 174 $ 100 74% $ 131 -24%
Fiscal 2016 Compared to Fiscal 2015 Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014
Excluding changes in foreign currency exchange rates, revenues for Japan Constant currency revenues for Japan increased 9% in fiscal 2015, driven
increased 22% for fiscal 2016, driven by growth in most key categories, led by primarily by increases in Sportswear, Running, the Jordan Brand and NIKE
Sportswear, Running and the Jordan Brand. DTC revenues were 37% higher, Basketball, partially offset by declines in Men’s Training, Golf and Women’s
due to strong online sales growth, comparable store sales growth of 17% and Training. DTC revenues grew 40% in fiscal 2015 driven by a 20% increase in
the addition of new stores. comparable store sales, strong online sales growth and the addition of new
stores.
Reported EBIT increased 74%, despite the weaker Yen. EBIT growth was
K
driven by higher reported revenues, gross margin expansion and significant On a reported basis, fiscal 2015 EBIT decreased 24% compared to the prior
-
selling and administrative expense leverage. Gross margin expanded 270 year period, reflecting the impact of the weaker Yen. Gross margin decreased 0
1
basis points due to higher full-price ASP, in part due to lower discounts, as 270 basis points as unfavorable standard foreign currency exchange rates
M
well as growth in our higher-margin DTC business, lower product input costs and higher product costs more than offset higher full-price ASP and an
and warehousing efficiencies, which more than offset unfavorable standard increase in the proportion of revenues from our higher-margin DTC business. R
O
foreign currency exchange rates. Selling and administrative expense Selling and administrative expense increased as a percent of revenues as
F
decreased as a percent of revenues despite investments in operating higher operating overhead, primarily to support our expanding DTC business,
overhead to support our growing DTC business. Demand creation spending was only partially offset by a decrease in demand creation expense.
for DTC marketing and brand events was largely offset by lower spending for
retail brand presentation and advertising costs.
Emerging Markets
% Change % Change
Excluding Excluding
Currency Currency
Fiscal 2016 Fiscal 2015 % Change Changes Fiscal 2014 % Change Changes
(Dollars in millions)
Revenues by:
Footwear $ 2,536 $ 2,641 -4% 14% $ 2,642 0% 9%
Apparel 947 1,021 -7% 11% 1,061 -4% 5%
Equipment 218 236 -8% 11% 246 -4% 5%
TOTAL REVENUES $ 3,701 $ 3,898 -5% 13% $ 3,949 -1% 8%
Revenues by:
Sales to Wholesale Customers $ 3,049 $ 3,247 -6% 11% $ 3,483 -7% 2%
Sales Direct to Consumer 652 651 0% 23% 466 40% 51%
TOTAL REVENUES $ 3,701 $ 3,898 -5% 13% $ 3,949 -1% 8%
EARNINGS BEFORE INTEREST AND TAXES $ 892 $ 818 9% $ 952 -14%
Fiscal 2016 Compared to Fiscal 2015 The constant currency growth in footwear revenue for fiscal 2016 was driven
by higher revenues in nearly every key category, most notably Sportswear
Excluding changes in foreign currency exchange rates, fiscal 2016 revenues and Running. For fiscal 2016, unit sales of footwear increased 1%, while
for Emerging Markets increased 13%. Growth was attributable to higher higher ASP per pair contributed approximately 13 percentage points of
revenues in 7 of 9 territories, led by one of our largest territories, SOCO (which footwear revenue growth. Higher ASP was attributable to higher full-price
includes Argentina, Uruguay and Chile), which grew 32%, and by Mexico and ASP, primarily reflecting inflationary conditions in certain territories, and to a
Pacific (which includes Australia and New Zealand), which grew 31% and lesser extent, the favorable impact of an increase in the proportion of
27%, respectively. Revenues declined 5% in Brazil, primarily reflecting on- revenues from our higher-priced DTC business.
going macroeconomic challenges. On a category basis, revenues grew in
The constant currency growth in apparel revenue was due to increases in
nearly every key category, led by Sportswear and Running. DTC revenues
most key categories, led by Sportswear, Running and Women’s Training.
increased 23%, driven by the addition of new stores, comparable store sales
Fiscal 2016 unit sales of apparel decreased 2%, while higher ASP per unit
growth of 7% and online sales growth.
contributed approximately 13 percentage points of apparel revenue growth.
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 85
Page#33
PART II
Higher ASP was due to higher full-price ASP, primarily reflecting inflationary by Sportswear, Running, Action Sports and the Jordan Brand, partially offset
conditions in certain territories, and to a lesser extent, the favorable impact of by a decline in Football (Soccer). DTC revenues increased 51% compared to
an increase in the proportion of revenues from our higher-priced DTC fiscal 2014, driven by strong comparable store sales growth of 26%, the
business. addition of new stores and online sales growth.
On a reported basis, EBIT increased 9%, despite the negative impact of The constant currency growth in footwear revenue for fiscal 2015 was
foreign currency exchange rates, primarily the Argentine Peso, Mexican Peso attributable to increases in several key categories, most notably Sportswear,
and Korean Won, as gross margin expansion more than offset lower reported Action Sports, the Jordan Brand and Running. Unit sales of footwear
revenues and higher selling and administrative expense as a percent of decreased 2% while higher ASP per pair contributed approximately 11
revenues. Gross margin expanded 350 basis points due to higher full-price percentage points of footwear revenue growth. Higher ASP per pair was
ASP, lower warehousing and obsolescence costs, and growth in our higher- primarily due to higher full-price ASP reflecting price increases in response to
margin DTC business, partially offset by shifts in mix to higher-cost products inflationary conditions in certain Latin American countries, particularly
and unfavorable standard foreign currency exchange rates. Selling and Argentina, as well as the favorable impact of growth in our higher-priced DTC
administrative expense declined on a reported basis, but was higher as a business.
percent of revenues as higher operating overhead due to additional
Constant currency apparel revenue growth was due to increases in nearly all
investments in our DTC business and operating infrastructure, and higher
key categories, primarily Sportswear, Running and Women’s Training,
performance-based compensation were more than offset by changes in
partially offset by a decline in Football (Soccer) revenues due to higher World
foreign currency exchange rates. Demand creation expense also increased
Cup sales in fiscal 2014. Unit sales of apparel decreased 1% for fiscal 2015.
driven by sports marketing and digital brand marketing costs, offset by the
Higher ASP per unit contributed approximately 6 percentage points of
impact of foreign currency exchange rates.
apparel revenue growth, primarily attributable to an increase in the proportion
of revenues from our higher-priced DTC business, and to a lesser extent,
higher full-price ASP driven by price increases in response to inflationary
Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014
conditions.
On a currency-neutral basis, fiscal 2015 revenues for Emerging Markets
On a reported basis, EBIT decreased 14% primarily due to reported revenue
increased 8%, driven by growth in 7 of 9 territories. Growth was led by SOCO
declines, lower gross margin and higher selling and administrative expense,
and Pacific which grew 28% and 26%, respectively. Revenues in our Mexico
as well as the impact of weakening foreign currency exchange rates. Gross
and Brazil territories decreased 21% and 3%, respectively. The decrease in
margin decreased 140 basis points due to unfavorable standard foreign
Mexico was attributable to efforts to liquidate excess inventory in the
currency exchange rates, higher inventory obsolescence and higher off-price
marketplace largely resulting from an inconsistent flow of product to
mix, partially offset by higher full-price ASP. Selling and administrative
customers following distribution center transition issues in fiscal 2014, while
expense increased due to higher operating overhead costs, primarily to
the decrease in Brazil was primarily due to challenging macroeconomic
support DTC growth, as well as higher demand creation expense, in part as a
conditions and comparison to strong sales related to the World Cup in fiscal
result of support for the World Cup in early fiscal 2015 and higher sports
2014. On a category basis, revenues were higher in most key categories, led
marketing expense.
Global Brand Divisions
% Change % Change
Excluding Excluding
Currency Currency
Fiscal 2016 Fiscal 2015 % Change Changes Fiscal 2014 % Change Changes
(Dollars in millions)
Revenues $ 73 $ 115 -37% -30% $ 125 -8% -2%
(Loss) Before Interest and Taxes $ (2,596) $ (2,267) 15% $ (1,993) 14%
Global Brand Divisions primarily represent demand creation, operating consumer-focused digital capabilities, partially offset by lower performance-
overhead and product creation and design expenses that are centrally based compensation expenses. Demand creation expense increased due to
managed for the NIKE Brand. Revenues for Global Brand Divisions are higher advertising and digital brand marketing expenses.
primarily attributable to NIKE Brand licensing businesses that are not part of a
geographic operating segment.
Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014
Global Brand Divisions’ loss before interest and taxes increased $274 million
Fiscal 2016 Compared to Fiscal 2015
in fiscal 2015, primarily due to higher operating overhead reflecting continued
Global Brand Divisions’ loss before interest and taxes increased $329 million investments in operational infrastructure, including digital capabilities,
for fiscal 2016 due to higher operating overhead and demand creation consumer engagement and supply chain initiatives, as well as higher
expense, and to a lesser extent, lower revenues, largely resulting from the performance-based compensation. Demand creation expense increased
expiration of certain football club endorsement agreements. Operating slightly due to support for the World Cup in the first quarter of fiscal 2015 and
overhead increased due to investments in operational infrastructure and key brand and consumer events.
Converse
% Change % Change
Excluding Excluding
Currency Currency
Fiscal 2016 Fiscal 2015 % Change Changes Fiscal 2014 % Change Changes
(Dollars in millions)
Revenues $ 1,955 $ 1,982 -1% 2% $ 1,684 18% 21%
Earnings Before Interest and Taxes $ 487 $ 517 -6% $ 496 4%
86
Page#34
PART II
In territories we define as “direct distribution markets” Converse designs, cost products and higher off-price mix more than offset higher full-price ASP.
markets and sells products directly to distributors, wholesale customers and Selling and administrative expense declined faster than reported revenues
to consumers through DTC operations. The largest direct distribution markets primarily due to lower demand creation, which more than offset slightly higher
are the United States, the United Kingdom and China. We do not own the operating overhead due to investments in infrastructure to support growth.
Converse trademarks in Japan. Territories other than direct distribution
markets and Japan are serviced by third-party licensees who pay royalty
revenues to Converse for the use of its registered trademarks and other Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014
intellectual property rights.
Excluding changes in currency exchange rates, revenues for Converse
increased 21% for fiscal 2015. Comparable direct distribution markets grew
14%, contributing 12 percentage points of total revenue growth for fiscal
Fiscal 2016 Compared to Fiscal 2015
2015. Comparable direct distribution market unit sales increased 12% and
Excluding changes in foreign currency exchange rates, Converse revenues higher ASP per unit contributed approximately 2 percentage points of
increased 2% for fiscal 2016. Comparable direct distribution markets (i.e. Converse comparable direct distribution market revenue growth. The United
markets served under a direct distribution model for comparable periods in States market was the most significant contributor to the growth of
the current and prior fiscal years) grew 4%, contributing approximately 3 comparable direct distribution markets due to volume increases with key
percentage points of total Converse revenue growth for fiscal 2016. wholesale customers and expansion of our DTC business. Conversion of
Comparable direct distribution market unit sales decreased 2%, while higher markets from licensed to direct distribution contributed 8 percentage points of
ASP per unit contributed approximately 6 percentage points of direct total Converse revenue growth for fiscal 2015, driven by conversion of several
distribution market revenue growth. On a territory basis, growth in the United European markets, most significantly AGS (Austria, Germany and
States and Asia Pacific was partially offset by declines in Europe, primarily the Switzerland). Revenues from comparable licensed markets increased 8% for
United Kingdom. Conversion of markets from licensed to direct distribution fiscal 2015, contributing 1 percentage point of total Converse revenue
markets had an insignificant impact on total Converse revenue growth for growth.
fiscal 2016. Revenues from comparable licensed markets decreased 15% for
EBIT for Converse increased 4% for fiscal 2015 as strong revenue growth
fiscal 2016, reducing total Converse revenue growth by approximately 1
was partially offset by lower gross margin and higher selling and administrative
percentage point. The decrease in comparable licensed markets revenues
expense. Gross margin decreased 60 basis points primarily due to transitions
was primarily due to poor macroeconomic conditions in Latin America.
of licensed markets to direct distribution markets. Selling and administrative
K
Reported EBIT for Converse decreased 6% for fiscal 2016 as a decrease in expense increased for fiscal 2015, primarily due to higher operating overhead
-
reported revenues and lower gross margin more than offset selling and costs resulting from investments in infrastructure to support current and future 0
1
administrative expense leverage. Gross margin declined 220 basis points as growth, including market transitions, new systems and new headquarters, as
M
unfavorable standard foreign currency exchange rates, shifts in mix to higher- well as higher intellectual property enforcement costs.
R
O
F
Corporate
Fiscal 2016 Fiscal 2015 % Change Fiscal 2014 % Change
(Dollars in millions)
Revenues $ (86) $ (82) — $ 3 —
(Loss) Before Interest and Taxes $ (1,173) $ (1,097) 7%$ (1,036) 6%
Corporate revenues primarily consist of foreign currency hedge gains and (cid:129) a beneficial change of $76 million from net foreign currency losses to net
losses related to revenues generated by entities within the NIKE Brand foreign currency gains related to the difference between actual foreign
geographic operating segments and Converse but managed through our currency exchange rates and standard foreign currency exchange rates
central foreign exchange risk management program. assigned to the NIKE Brand geographic operating segments and Converse,
net of hedge gains; these gains are reported as a component of
The Corporate loss before interest and taxes consists largely of unallocated
consolidated gross margin; and
general and administrative expenses, including expenses associated with
centrally managed departments; depreciation and amortization related to our (cid:129) a beneficial change of $27 million in net foreign currency gains related to the
corporate headquarters; unallocated insurance, benefit and compensation re-measurement of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in non-
programs, including stock-based compensation; and certain foreign currency functional currencies and the impact of certain foreign currency derivative
gains and losses. instruments, reported as a component of Other (income) expense, net.
In addition to the foreign currency gains and losses recognized in Corporate
revenues, foreign currency results in Corporate include gains and losses
Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014
resulting from the difference between actual foreign currency rates and
standard rates used to record non-functional currency denominated product
For fiscal 2015, Corporate’s loss before interest and taxes increased $61
purchases within the NIKE Brand geographic operating segments and
million primarily due to the following:
Converse; related foreign currency hedge results; conversion gains and
(cid:129) a $203 million increase, primarily in corporate overhead expense related to
losses arising from re-measurement of monetary assets and liabilities in non-
corporate initiatives to support growth of the business as well as higher
functional currencies; and certain other foreign currency derivative
performance-based compensation;
instruments.
(cid:129) a $144 million beneficial change from net foreign currency losses to net
foreign currency gains, reported as a component of Other (income)
Fiscal 2016 Compared to Fiscal 2015
expense, net; and
For fiscal 2016, Corporate’s loss before interest and taxes increased $76
(cid:129) an approximate $2 million increase in foreign exchange losses related to the
million primarily due to the following:
difference between actual foreign currency exchange rates and standard
foreign currency exchange rates assigned to the NIKE Brand geographic
(cid:129) an increase of $179 million, primarily driven by higher operating overhead
operating segments and Converse, net of hedge gains; these losses are
expense to support corporate growth initiatives;
reported as a component of consolidated gross margin.
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 87
Page#35
PART II
Foreign Currency Exposures and Hedging Practices
Overview the factories in the production of NIKE branded products (“factory
input costs”) are denominated.
As a global company with significant operations outside the United States, in
For the currency within the factory currency exposure indices that is
the normal course of business we are exposed to risk arising from changes in
the local or functional currency of the factory, the currency rate
currency exchange rates. Our primary foreign currency exposures arise from
fluctuation affecting the product cost is recorded within Inventories
the recording of transactions denominated in non-functional currencies and
and is recognized in Cost of sales when the related product is sold to a
the translation of foreign currency denominated results of operations, financial
third-party. All currencies within the indices, excluding the U.S. Dollar
position and cash flows into U.S. Dollars.
and the local or functional currency of the factory, are recognized as
embedded derivative contracts and are recorded at fair value through
Our foreign exchange risk management program is intended to lessen both
Other (income) expense, net. Refer to Note 16 — Risk Management
the positive and negative effects of currency fluctuations on our consolidated
and Derivatives in the accompanying Notes to the Consolidated
results of operations, financial position and cash flows. We manage global
Financial Statements for additional detail.
foreign exchange risk centrally on a portfolio basis to address those risks that
are material to NIKE, Inc. We manage these exposures by taking advantage
As an offset to the impacts of the fluctuating U.S. Dollar on our non-
of natural offsets and currency correlations that exist within the portfolio and,
functional currency denominated product purchases described
where practical and material, by hedging a portion of the remaining exposures
above, a strengthening U.S. Dollar against the foreign currencies
using derivative instruments such as forward contracts and options. As
within the factory currency exposure indices decreases NIKE’s
described below, the implementation of the NIKE Trading Company (“NTC”)
U.S. Dollar inventory cost. Conversely, a weakening U.S. Dollar
and our foreign currency adjustment program enhanced our ability to manage
against the indexed foreign currencies increases our inventory cost.
our foreign exchange risk by increasing the natural offsets and currency
(cid:129) Non-Functional Currency Denominated External Sales — A portion of our
correlation benefits that exist within our portfolio of foreign exchange
Western Europe and Central & Eastern Europe geography revenues, as well
exposures. Our hedging policy is designed to partially or entirely offset the
as a portion of our Converse European operations revenues, are earned in
impact of exchange rate changes on the underlying net exposures being
currencies other than the Euro (e.g. the British Pound) but are recognized at
hedged. Where exposures are hedged, our program has the effect of
a subsidiary that uses the Euro as its functional currency. These sales
delaying the impact of exchange rate movements on our Consolidated
generate a foreign currency exposure.
Financial Statements; the length of the delay is dependent upon hedge
horizons. We do not hold or issue derivative instruments for trading or
(cid:129) Other Costs — Non-functional currency denominated costs, such as
speculative purposes.
endorsement contracts, also generate foreign currency risk, though to a
lesser extent. In certain cases, the Company has also entered into other
contractual agreements which have payments that are indexed to foreign
Transactional Exposures currencies and create embedded derivative contracts that are recorded at
fair value through Other (income) expense, net. Refer to Note 16 — Risk
We conduct business in various currencies and have transactions which Management and Derivatives in the accompanying Notes to the
subject us to foreign currency risk. Our most significant transactional foreign Consolidated Financial Statements for additional detail.
currency exposures are:
(cid:129) Non-Functional Currency Denominated Monetary Assets and Liabilities —
Our global subsidiaries have various assets and liabilities, primarily
(cid:129) Product Costs — NIKE’s product costs are exposed to fluctuations in
receivables and payables, including intercompany receivables and
foreign currencies in the following ways:
payables, denominated in currencies other than their functional currencies.
1. Product purchases denominated in currencies other than the These balance sheet items are subject to re-measurement which may
functional currency of the transacting entity: create fluctuations in Other (income) expense, net within our consolidated
results of operations.
a. Certain NIKE entities purchase product from the NTC, a wholly-
owned sourcing hub that buys NIKE branded products from
third-party factories, predominantly in U.S. Dollars. The NTC, Managing Transactional Exposures
whose functional currency is the U.S. Dollar, then sells the
Transactional exposures are managed on a portfolio basis within our foreign
products to NIKE entities in their respective functional currencies.
currency risk management program. We manage these exposures by taking
When the NTC sells to a NIKE entity with a different functional
advantage of natural offsets and currency correlations that exist within the
currency, the result is a foreign currency exposure for the NTC.
portfolio and may also elect to use currency forward and option contracts to
b. Other NIKE entities purchase product directly from third-party hedge a portion of the remaining effect of exchange rate fluctuations on
factories in U.S. Dollars. These purchases generate a foreign probable forecasted future cash flows, including certain product cost
currency exposure for those NIKE entities with a functional purchase exposures, non-functional currency denominated external sales
currency other than the U.S. Dollar. and other costs described above. Generally, these are accounted for as cash
flow hedges in accordance with the accounting standards for derivatives and
In both purchasing scenarios, a weaker U.S. Dollar decreases the
hedging, except for hedges of the embedded derivatives component of the
inventory cost incurred by NIKE whereas a stronger U.S. Dollar
product cost exposures as discussed below.
increases its cost.
Certain currency forward contracts used to manage the foreign exchange
2. Factory input costs: NIKE operates a foreign currency adjustment exposure of non-functional currency denominated monetary assets and
program with certain factories. The program is designed to more liabilities subject to re-measurement and the embedded derivative contracts
effectively manage foreign currency risk by assuming certain of the discussed above are not formally designated as hedging instruments under
factories’ foreign currency exposures, some of which are natural the accounting standards for derivatives and hedging. Accordingly, changes
offsets to our existing foreign currency exposures. Under this in fair value of these instruments are immediately recognized in Other (income)
program, our payments to these factories are adjusted for rate expense, net and are intended to offset the foreign currency impact of the re-
fluctuations in the basket of currencies (“factory currency exposure measurement of the related non-functional currency denominated asset or
index”) in which the labor, materials and overhead costs incurred by liability or the embedded derivative contract being hedged.
88
Page#36
PART II
Refer to Note 6 — Fair Value Measurements and Note 16 — Risk exposure that qualifies for hedge accounting under the accounting standards
Management and Derivatives in the accompanying Notes to the Consolidated for derivatives and hedging. We utilize forward contracts and/or options to
Financial Statements for additional description of how the above financial mitigate the variability of the forecasted future purchases and sales of these
instruments are valued and recorded as well as the fair value of outstanding U.S. Dollar investments. The combination of the purchase and sale of the
derivatives at each reported period end. U.S. Dollar investment and the hedging instrument has the effect of partially
offsetting the year-over-year foreign currency translation impact on net
earnings in the period the investments are sold. Hedges of available-for-sale
Translational Exposures investments are accounted for as cash flow hedges.
Refer to Note 6 — Fair Value Measurements and Note 16 — Risk
Many of our foreign subsidiaries operate in functional currencies other than
Management and Derivatives in the accompanying Notes to the Consolidated
the U.S. Dollar. Fluctuations in currency exchange rates create volatility in our
Financial Statements for additional description of how the above financial
reported results as we are required to translate the balance sheets,
instruments are valued and recorded as well as the fair value of outstanding
operational results and cash flows of these subsidiaries into U.S. Dollars for
derivatives at each reported period end.
consolidated reporting. The translation of foreign subsidiaries’ non-U.S. Dollar
denominated balance sheets into U.S. Dollars for consolidated reporting
We estimate the combination of translation of foreign currency-denominated
results in a cumulative translation adjustment to Accumulated other
profits from our international businesses and the year-over-year change in
comprehensive income within the Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’
foreign currency related gains and losses included in Other (income) expense,
Equity. In the translation of our Consolidated Statements of Income, a weaker
net had an unfavorable impact of approximately $423 million and $73 million
U.S. Dollar in relation to foreign functional currencies benefits our consolidated
on our Income before income taxes for the years ended May 31, 2016 and
earnings whereas a stronger U.S. Dollar reduces our consolidated earnings.
2015, respectively.
The impact of foreign exchange rate fluctuations on the translation of our
consolidated Revenues was a detriment of approximately $1,985 million and
$1,171 million for the years ended May 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively. The
Net Investments in Foreign Subsidiaries
impact of foreign exchange rate fluctuations on the translation of our Income
before income taxes was a detriment of approximately $449 million and $221
We are also exposed to the impact of foreign exchange fluctuations on our
million for the years ended May 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
investments in wholly-owned foreign subsidiaries denominated in a currency
other than the U.S. Dollar, which could adversely impact the U.S. Dollar value
K
of these investments and therefore the value of future repatriated earnings.
Managing Translational Exposures
-
We have, in the past, hedged and may, in the future, hedge net investment
0
positions in certain foreign subsidiaries to mitigate the effects of foreign 1
To minimize the impact of translating foreign currency denominated revenues
exchange fluctuations on these net investments. These hedges are M
and expenses into U.S. Dollars for consolidated reporting, certain foreign
accounted for in accordance with the accounting standards for net
R
subsidiaries use excess cash to purchase U.S. Dollar denominated available-
investment hedges. There were no outstanding net investment hedges as of O
for-sale investments. The variable future cash flows associated with the
May 31, 2016 and 2015. There were no cash flows from net investment F
purchase and subsequent sale of these U.S. Dollar denominated securities at
hedge settlements for the years ended May 31, 2016 and 2015.
non-U.S. Dollar functional currency subsidiaries creates a foreign currency
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flow Activity In fiscal 2017, we plan to continue investing in our infrastructure to support
future growth, as well as expand our digital capabilities. We anticipate
Cash provided by operations was $3,096 million for fiscal 2016 compared to investing approximately 4% of revenue, a portion of which will be used for the
$4,680 million for fiscal 2015. Our primary source of operating cash flow for continued expansion of our corporate facilities, new DTC stores and digital
fiscal 2016 was Net income of $3,760 million. Our fiscal 2016 change in capabilities.
working capital was a net cash outflow of $1,580 million as compared to a net
Cash used by financing activities was $2,671 million for fiscal 2016 compared
cash inflow of $256 million for fiscal 2015. The change in working capital was
to $2,790 million for fiscal 2015, a decrease of $119 million, as increases in
primarily due to a net decrease in the amount of cash collateral received as a
share repurchases and dividends were more than offset by the receipt of
result of hedging activities (refer to the Credit Risk section of Note 16 — Risk
$981 million in net proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt in October
Management and Derivatives for additional detail). For fiscal 2016, cash
2015.
collateral received from counterparties declined $863 million as compared to
an increase in collateral received from counterparties of $968 million for fiscal
In fiscal 2016, we purchased 55.4 million shares of NIKE’s Class B Common
2015.
Stock for $3,238 million (an average price of $58.44). During the third quarter
of fiscal 2016, we concluded the Company’s four-year, $8 billion share
Cash used by investing activities was $1,034 million for fiscal 2016, compared
repurchase program approved by our Board of Directors in September 2012.
to a $175 million use of cash for fiscal 2015. The primary driver of the increase
Under this program the Company purchased a total of 197.1 million shares at
in Cash used by investing activities was the net change in short-term
a cost of $8 billion (an average price of $40.58 per share). Following the
investments (including sales, maturities and purchases) from net sales/
completion of this program, the Company began purchases under a four-
maturities to net purchases. In fiscal 2016, there were $57 million of net
year, $12 billion program approved by our Board of Directors in November
purchases of short-term investments compared to $935 million of net sales/
2015. Of the total 55.4 million shares repurchased in fiscal 2016, 20.1 million
maturities of short-term investments in the same period of fiscal 2015.
shares were purchased under this new program at a cost of approximately
Additions to property, plant and equipment were $1,143 million for fiscal 2016
$1,189 million (an average price of $59.21 per share). We continue to expect
as compared to $963 million for fiscal 2015. The increase in Additions to
funding of share repurchases will come from operating cash flow, excess
property, plant and equipment resulted from continued investments in
cash and/or debt. The timing and the amount of shares purchased will be
infrastructure to support current and future growth, primarily relating to supply
dictated by our capital needs and stock market conditions.
chain and corporate initiatives, as well as expansion of our DTC operations.
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 89
Page#37
PART II
Capital Resources issuance of commercial paper or other debt securities during fiscal 2017 will
depend on general corporate needs. We currently have short-term debt
On April 23, 2013, we filed a shelf registration statement (the “Shelf”) with the ratings of A1+ and P1 from Standard and Poor’s Corporation and Moody’s
SEC which permitted us to issue an unlimited amount of debt securities. On Investor Services, respectively.
April 23, 2013, we issued $1.0 billion of senior notes with tranches maturing in
As of May 31, 2016, we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term
2023 and 2043. The 2023 senior notes were issued in an initial aggregate
investments totaling $5.5 billion, of which $4.6 billion was held by our foreign
principal amount of $500 million at a 2.25% fixed, annual interest rate and will
subsidiaries. Included in Cash and equivalents as of May 31, 2016 was $105
mature on May 1, 2023. The 2043 senior notes were issued in an initial
million of cash collateral received from counterparties as a result of hedging
aggregate principal amount of $500 million at a 3.625% fixed, annual interest
activity. Cash equivalents and Short-term investments consist primarily of
rate and will mature on May 1, 2043. Interest on the senior notes is payable
deposits held at major banks, money market funds, commercial paper,
semi-annually on May 1 and November 1 of each year. The issuance resulted
corporate notes, U.S. Treasury obligations, U.S. government sponsored
in gross proceeds before expenses of $998 million. On October 29, 2015, we
enterprise obligations and other investment grade fixed income
issued an additional $1.0 billion of senior notes at a 3.875% fixed, annual
securities. Our fixed income investments are exposed to both credit and
interest rate that will mature on November 1, 2045. Interest on the senior
interest rate risk. All of our investments are investment grade to minimize our
notes is payable semi-annually on May 1 and November 1 of each year. The
credit risk. While individual securities have varying durations, as of May 31,
issuance resulted in proceeds before expenses of $991 million. The Shelf
2016, the weighted average remaining duration of our cash equivalents and
expired on April 23, 2016. We plan to file a new shelf registration statement
short-term investments portfolio was 91 days.
with the SEC in July 2016.
To date we have not experienced difficulty accessing the credit markets or
On August 28, 2015, we entered into a committed credit facility agreement
incurred higher interest costs. Future volatility in the capital markets, however,
with a syndicate of banks, which provides for up to $2 billion of borrowings.
may increase costs associated with issuing commercial paper or other debt
The facility matures August 28, 2020, with a one year extension option prior to
instruments or affect our ability to access those markets. We believe that
any anniversary of the closing date, provided that in no event shall it extend
existing cash, cash equivalents, short-term investments and cash generated
beyond August 28, 2022. This facility replaces the prior $1 billion credit facility
by operations, together with access to external sources of funds as described
agreement entered into on November 1, 2011, which would have matured
above, will be sufficient to meet our domestic and foreign capital needs in the
November 1, 2017. As of and for the periods ended May 31, 2016 and 2015,
foreseeable future.
we had no amounts outstanding under either committed credit facility.
We utilize a variety of tax planning and financing strategies to manage our
We currently have long-term debt ratings of AA- and A1 from Standard and
worldwide cash and deploy funds to locations where they are needed. We
Poor’s Corporation and Moody’s Investor Services, respectively. If our long-
routinely repatriate a portion of our foreign earnings for which U.S. taxes have
term debt ratings were to decline, the facility fee and interest rate under our
previously been provided. We also indefinitely reinvest a significant portion of
committed credit facility would increase. Conversely, if our long-term debt
our foreign earnings, and our current plans do not demonstrate a need to
rating were to improve, the facility fee and interest rate would decrease.
repatriate these earnings. Should we require additional capital in the United
Changes in our long-term debt rating would not trigger acceleration of
States, we may elect to repatriate indefinitely reinvested foreign funds or raise
maturity of any then-outstanding borrowings or any future borrowings under
capital in the United States through debt. If we were to repatriate indefinitely
the committed credit facility. Under this committed revolving credit facility, we
reinvested foreign funds, we would be required to accrue and pay additional
have agreed to various covenants. These covenants include limits on our
U.S. taxes less applicable foreign tax credits. If we elect to raise capital in the
disposal of fixed assets, the amount of debt secured by liens we may incur, as
United States through debt, we would incur additional interest expense.
well as limits on the indebtedness we can incur relative to our net worth. In the
event we were to have any borrowings outstanding under this facility and
failed to meet any covenant, and were unable to obtain a waiver from a
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
majority of the banks in the syndicate, any borrowings would become
immediately due and payable. As of May 31, 2016, we were in full compliance
In connection with various contracts and agreements, we routinely provide
with each of these covenants and believe it is unlikely we will fail to meet any of
indemnification relating to the enforceability of intellectual property rights,
these covenants in the foreseeable future.
coverage for legal issues that arise and other items where we are acting as the
Liquidity is also provided by our $2 billion commercial paper program, which guarantor. Currently, we have several such agreements in place. However,
increased $1 billion during the second quarter of fiscal 2016. During the year based on our historical experience and the estimated probability of future loss,
ended May 31, 2016, we did not issue commercial paper, and as of May 31, we have determined that the fair value of such indemnification is not material
2016, there were no outstanding borrowings under this program. Any future to our financial position or results of operations.
Contractual Obligations
Our significant long-term contractual obligations as of May 31, 2016 and significant endorsement contracts, including related marketing commitments, entered
into through the date of this report are as follows:
Description of Commitment Cash Payments Due During the Year Ending May 31,
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Thereafter Total
(In millions)
Operating Leases $ 491 $ 453 $ 395 $ 347 $ 301 $ 1,244 $ 3,231
Capital Leases 7 5 2 1 — — 15
Long-Term Debt(1) 115 75 74 74 71 3,365 3,774
Endorsement Contracts(2) 1,198 1,238 945 827 698 4,514 9,420
Product Purchase Obligations(3) 4,149 — — — — — 4,149
Other Purchase Obligations(4) 384 118 90 48 42 90 772
TOTAL $ 6,344 $ 1,889 $ 1,506 $ 1,297 $ 1,112 $ 9,213 $ 21,361
(1) The cash payments due for long-term debt include estimated interest payments. Estimates of interest payments are based on outstanding principal amounts, applicable fixed interest rates
or currently effective interest rates as of May 31, 2016 (if variable), timing of scheduled payments and the term of the debt obligations.
90
Page#38
PART II
(2) The amounts listed for endorsement contracts represent approximate amounts of base compensation and minimum guaranteed royalty fees we are obligated to pay athlete, sport team
and league endorsers of our products. Actual payments under some contracts may be higher than the amounts listed as these contracts provide for bonuses to be paid to the endorsers
based upon athletic achievements and/or royalties on product sales in future periods. Actual payments under some contracts may also be lower as these contracts include provisions for
reduced payments if athletic performance declines in future periods.
In addition to the cash payments, we are obligated to furnish our endorsers with NIKE product for their use. It is not possible to determine how much we will spend on this product on an
annual basis as the contracts generally do not stipulate a specific amount of cash to be spent on the product. The amount of product provided to the endorsers will depend on many
factors, including general playing conditions, the number of sporting events in which they participate and our own decisions regarding product and marketing initiatives. In addition, the
costs to design, develop, source and purchase the products furnished to the endorsers are incurred over a period of time and are not necessarily tracked separately from similar costs
incurred for products sold to customers.
(3) We generally order product at least four to five months in advance of sale based primarily on futures orders received from external wholesale customers and internal orders from our DTC
in-line stores and e-commerce operations. The amounts listed for product purchase obligations represent agreements (including open purchase orders) to purchase products in the
ordinary course of business that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms. In some cases, prices are subject to change throughout the production process.
(4) Other purchase obligations primarily include service and marketing commitments, including marketing commitments associated with endorsement contracts, made in the ordinary course
of business. The amounts represent the minimum payments required by legally binding contracts and agreements that specify all significant terms, including open purchase orders for non-
product purchases.
In addition to the above, we have long-term obligations for uncertain tax positions and various post-retirement benefits for which we are not able to reasonably
estimate when cash payments will occur. Refer to Note 9 — Income Taxes and Note 13 — Benefit Plans in the accompanying Notes to the Consolidated
Financial Statements for further information related to uncertain tax positions and post-retirement benefits, respectively.
We also have the following outstanding short-term debt obligations as of May 31, 2016. Refer to Note 7 — Short-Term Borrowings and Credit Lines in the
accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further description and interest rates related to the short-term debt obligations listed below.
Outstanding as
of May 31, 2016
(In millions)
Notes payable, due at mutually agreed-upon dates within one year of issuance or on demand $ 1
Payable to Sojitz America for the purchase of inventories, generally due 60 days after shipment of goods from a foreign port 39
As of May 31, 2016, the Company had letters of credit outstanding totaling $157 million. These letters of credit were issued primarily for the purchase of inventory
and as guarantees of the Company’s performance under certain self-insurance and other programs.
K
New Accounting Pronouncements
-
0
1
Refer to Note 1 — Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for recently adopted and
M
recently issued accounting standards.
R
O
Critical Accounting Policies
F
Our previous discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of In some instances, we ship product directly from our supplier to the customer
operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have and recognize revenue when the product is delivered to and accepted by the
been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted customer. Our revenues may fluctuate in cases when our customers delay
in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements accepting shipment of product for periods of up to several weeks.
requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported
In certain countries outside of the United States, precise information regarding
amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosure
the date of receipt by the customer is not readily available. In these cases, we
of contingent assets and liabilities.
estimate the date of receipt by the customer based upon historical delivery
We believe that the estimates, assumptions and judgments involved in the times by geographic location. On the basis of our tests of actual transactions,
accounting policies described below have the greatest potential impact on we have no indication that these estimates have been materially inaccurate
our financial statements, so we consider these to be our critical accounting historically.
policies. Because of the uncertainty inherent in these matters, actual results
As part of our revenue recognition policy, we record estimated sales returns,
could differ from the estimates we use in applying the critical accounting
discounts and miscellaneous claims from customers as reductions to
policies. Certain of these critical accounting policies affect working capital
revenues at the time revenues are recorded. Our post invoice sales discounts
account balances, including the policies for revenue recognition, the
consist of contractual programs with certain customers or discretionary
allowance for uncollectible accounts receivable, inventory reserves and
discounts that are expected to be granted to certain customers at a later date.
contingent payments under endorsement contracts. These policies require
We base our estimates on (1) historical rates of product returns, discounts
that we make estimates in the preparation of our financial statements as of a
and claims, (2) specific identification of outstanding claims and outstanding
given date. However, since our business cycle is relatively short, actual results
returns not yet received from customers and (3) estimated returns, discounts
related to these estimates are generally known within the six-month period
and claims expected but not yet finalized with our customers. Actual returns,
following the financial statement date. Thus, these policies generally affect
discounts and claims in any future period are inherently uncertain and thus
only the timing of reported amounts across two to three fiscal quarters.
may differ from our estimates. If actual or expected future returns, discounts
Within the context of these critical accounting policies, we are not currently and claims are significantly greater or lower than established reserves, we
aware of any reasonably likely events or circumstances that would result in record a reduction or increase to net revenues in the period in which we make
materially different amounts being reported. such determination.
Revenue Recognition Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts
Receivable
We record wholesale revenues when title passes and the risks and rewards of
ownership have passed to the customer, based on the terms of sale. Title
We make ongoing estimates relating to the ability to collect our accounts
passes generally upon shipment or upon receipt by the customer depending
receivable and maintain an allowance for estimated losses resulting from the
on the country of the sale and the agreement with the customer. Retail store
inability of our customers to make required payments. In determining the
revenues are recorded at the time of sale and online store revenues are
amount of the allowance, we consider our historical level of credit losses and
recorded upon delivery to the customer.
make judgments about the creditworthiness of significant customers based
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 91
Page#39
PART II
on ongoing credit evaluations. Since we cannot predict future changes in the We review the carrying value of long-lived assets or asset groups to be used
financial stability of our customers, actual future losses from uncollectible in operations whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the
accounts may differ from our estimates. If the financial condition of our carrying amount of the assets might not be recoverable. Factors that would
customers were to deteriorate, resulting in their inability to make payments, a necessitate an impairment assessment include a significant adverse change
larger allowance might be required. In the event we determine that a smaller in the extent or manner in which an asset is used, a significant adverse
or larger allowance is appropriate, we would record a credit or a charge to change in legal factors or the business climate that could affect the value of
Operating overhead expense in the period in which such a determination is the asset or a significant decline in the observable market value of an asset,
made. among others. If such facts indicate a potential impairment, we would assess
the recoverability of an asset group by determining if the carrying value of the
asset group exceeds the sum of the projected undiscounted cash flows
Inventory Reserves expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the assets over the
remaining economic life of the primary asset in the asset group. If the
We also make ongoing estimates relating to the net realizable value of recoverability test indicates that the carrying value of the asset group is not
inventories based upon our assumptions about future demand and market recoverable, we will estimate the fair value of the asset group using
conditions. If we estimate that the net realizable value of our inventory is less appropriate valuation methodologies that would typically include an estimate
than the cost of the inventory recorded on our books, we record a reserve of discounted cash flows. Any impairment would be measured as the
equal to the difference between the cost of the inventory and the estimated difference between the asset group’s carrying amount and its estimated fair
net realizable value. This reserve is recorded as a charge to Cost of sales. If value.
changes in market conditions result in reductions in the estimated net
realizable value of our inventory below our previous estimate, we would
increase our reserve in the period in which we made such a determination and Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
record a charge to Cost of sales.
We perform annual impairment tests on goodwill and intangible assets with
indefinite lives in the fourth quarter of each fiscal year or when events occur or
Contingent Payments under Endorsement circumstances change that would, more likely than not, reduce the fair value
of a reporting unit or an intangible asset with an indefinite life below its carrying
Contracts
value. Events or changes in circumstances that may trigger interim
impairment reviews include significant changes in business climate, operating
A significant portion of our Demand creation expense relates to payments
results, planned investments in the reporting unit, planned divestitures or an
under endorsement contracts. In general, endorsement payments are
expectation that the carrying amount may not be recoverable, among other
expensed uniformly over the term of the contract. However, certain contract
factors. We may first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more
elements may be accounted for differently, based upon the facts and
likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying
circumstances of each individual contract.
amount. If, after assessing the totality of events and circumstances, we
Certain contracts provide for contingent payments to endorsers based upon determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is
specific achievements in their sports (e.g., winning a championship). We greater than its carrying amount, the two-step impairment test is
record demand creation expense for these amounts when the endorser unnecessary. The two-step impairment test requires us to estimate the fair
achieves the specific goal. value of our reporting units. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its
fair value, the goodwill of that reporting unit is potentially impaired and we
Certain contracts provide for variable payments based upon endorsers
proceed to step two of the impairment analysis. In step two of the analysis, we
maintaining a level of performance in their sport over an extended period of
measure and record an impairment loss equal to the excess of the carrying
time (e.g., maintaining a specified ranking in a sport for a year). When we
value of the reporting unit’s goodwill over its implied fair value, if any.
determine payments are probable, the amounts are recorded in Demand
creation expense ratably over the contract period based on our best estimate We generally base our measurement of the fair value of a reporting unit on a
of the endorser’s performance. In these instances, to the extent that actual blended analysis of the present value of future discounted cash flows and the
payments to the endorser differ from our estimate due to changes in the market valuation approach. The discounted cash flows model indicates the
endorser’s performance, increased or decreased Demand creation expense fair value of the reporting unit based on the present value of the cash flows
may be recorded in a future period. that we expect the reporting unit to generate in the future. Our significant
estimates in the discounted cash flows model include: our weighted average
Certain contracts provide for royalty payments to endorsers based upon a
cost of capital; long-term rate of growth and profitability of the reporting unit’s
predetermined percent of sales of particular products. We expense these
business; and working capital effects. The market valuation approach
payments in Cost of sales as the related sales occur. In certain contracts, we
indicates the fair value of the business based on a comparison of the reporting
offer minimum guaranteed royalty payments. For contracts for which we
unit to comparable publicly traded companies in similar lines of business.
estimate we will not meet the minimum guaranteed amount of royalty fees
Significant estimates in the market valuation approach model include
through sales of product, we record the amount of the guaranteed payment in
identifying similar companies with comparable business factors such as size,
excess of that earned through sales of product in Demand creation expense
growth, profitability, risk and return on investment, and assessing comparable
uniformly over the contract term.
revenue and operating income multiples in estimating the fair value of the
reporting unit.
Property, Plant and Equipment and Definite-
Indefinite-lived intangible assets primarily consist of acquired trade names and
trademarks. We may first perform a qualitative assessment to determine
Lived Assets
whether it is more likely than not that an indefinite-lived intangible asset is
impaired. If, after assessing the totality of events and circumstances, we
Property, plant and equipment, including buildings, equipment and computer
determine that it is more likely than not that the indefinite-lived intangible asset
hardware and software are recorded at cost (including, in some cases, the
is not impaired, no quantitative fair value measurement is necessary. If a
cost of internal labor) and are depreciated over the estimated useful life.
quantitative fair value measurement calculation is required for these intangible
Changes in circumstances (such as technological advances or changes to
assets, we utilize the relief-from-royalty method. This method assumes that
our business operations) can result in differences between the actual and
trade names and trademarks have value to the extent that their owner is
estimated useful lives. In those cases where we determine that the useful life
relieved of the obligation to pay royalties for the benefits received from them.
of a long-lived asset should be shortened, we increase depreciation expense
This method requires us to estimate the future revenue for the related brands,
over the remaining useful life to depreciate the asset’s net book value to its
the appropriate royalty rate and the weighted average cost of capital.
salvage value.
92
Page#40
PART II
Fair Value Measurements of the over-hedged portion of the related hedge contract would be reported
as Other (income) expense, net during the period in which changes occur.
For financial assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis,
fair value is the price we would receive to sell an asset or pay to transfer a
liability in an orderly transaction with a market participant at the measurement Stock-based Compensation
date. In general, and where applicable, we use quoted prices in active
markets for identical assets or liabilities to determine the fair values of our We account for stock-based compensation by estimating the fair value of
financial instruments. This pricing methodology applies to our Level 1 stock-based compensation on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes
investments, including U.S. Treasury securities. option pricing model. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the
input of highly subjective assumptions including volatility. Expected volatility is
In the absence of active markets for identical assets or liabilities, such
estimated based on implied volatility in market traded options on our common
measurements involve developing assumptions based on market observable
stock with a term greater than one year, along with other factors. Our decision
data, including quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets
to use implied volatility was based on the availability of actively traded options
and quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in markets that are
on our common stock and our assessment that implied volatility is more
not active. This pricing methodology applies to our Level 2 investments such
representative of future stock price trends than historical volatility. If factors
as time deposits, commercial paper and bonds, U.S. Agency securities and
change and we use different assumptions for estimating stock-based
money market funds.
compensation expense in future periods, stock-based compensation
expense may differ materially in the future from that recorded in the current
Level 3 investments are valued using internally developed models with
period.
unobservable inputs. Assets and liabilities measured using unobservable
inputs are an immaterial portion of our portfolio.
A majority of our available-for-sale securities are priced by pricing vendors and Income Taxes
are generally Level 1 or Level 2 investments as these vendors either provide a
quoted market price in an active market or use observable inputs without We record valuation allowances against our deferred tax assets, when
applying significant adjustments in their pricing. Observable inputs include necessary. Realization of deferred tax assets (such as net operating loss
broker quotes, interest rates and yield curves observable at commonly carry-forwards) is dependent on future taxable earnings and is therefore
quoted intervals, volatilities and credit risks. Our fair value processes include uncertain. At least quarterly, we assess the likelihood that our deferred tax
controls that are designed to ensure appropriate fair values are asset balance will be recovered from future taxable income. To the extent we
K
recorded. These controls include a comparison to another independent believe that recovery is not likely, we establish a valuation allowance against -
0
pricing vendor. our net deferred tax asset, which increases our Income tax expense in the
1
period when such determination is made.
M
In addition, we have not recorded U.S. income tax expense for foreign R
Hedge Accounting for Derivatives
O
earnings that we have determined to be indefinitely reinvested outside the
F
United States, thus reducing our overall Income tax expense. The amount of
We use derivative contracts to hedge certain anticipated foreign currency and
earnings designated as indefinitely reinvested offshore is based upon the
interest rate transactions as well as certain non-functional currency monetary
actual deployment of such earnings in our offshore assets and our
assets and liabilities. When the specific criteria to qualify for hedge accounting
expectations of the future cash needs of our U.S. and foreign entities. Income
has been met, changes in the fair value of contracts hedging probable
tax considerations are also a factor in determining the amount of foreign
forecasted future cash flows are recorded in Other comprehensive income,
earnings to be indefinitely reinvested offshore.
rather than Net income, until the underlying hedged transaction affects Net
income. In most cases, this results in gains and losses on hedge derivatives
We carefully review all factors that drive the ultimate disposition of foreign
being released from Other comprehensive income into Net income sometime
earnings determined to be reinvested offshore and apply stringent standards
after the maturity of the derivative. One of the criteria for this accounting
to overcome the presumption of repatriation. Despite this approach, because
treatment is that the notional value of these derivative contracts should not be
the determination involves our future plans and expectations of future events,
in excess of specifically identified anticipated transactions. By their very
the possibility exists that amounts declared as indefinitely reinvested offshore
nature, our estimates of anticipated transactions may fluctuate over time and
may ultimately be repatriated. For instance, the actual cash needs of our U.S.
may ultimately vary from actual transactions. When anticipated transaction
entities may exceed our current expectations, or the actual cash needs of our
estimates or actual transaction amounts decline below hedged levels, or if it is
foreign entities may be less than our current expectations. This would result in
no longer probable that a forecasted transaction will occur by the end of the
additional Income tax expense in the year we determined that amounts were
originally specified time period or within an additional two-month period of
no longer indefinitely reinvested offshore. Conversely, our approach may also
time thereafter, we are required to reclassify the cumulative change in fair
result in a determination that accumulated foreign earnings (for which U.S.
value of the over-hedged portion of the related hedge contract from Other
income taxes have been provided) will be indefinitely reinvested offshore. In
comprehensive income to Other (income) expense, net during the quarter in
this case, our Income tax expense would be reduced in the year of such
which the decrease occurs.
determination.
We have used in the past, and may use in the future, forward contracts or
On an interim basis, we estimate what our effective tax rate will be for the full
options to hedge our investment in the net assets of certain international
fiscal year. This estimated annual effective tax rate is then applied to the year-
subsidiaries to offset foreign currency translation related to our net investment
to-date Income before income taxes excluding infrequently occurring or
in those subsidiaries. The change in fair value of the forward contracts or
unusual items, to determine the year-to-date Income tax expense. The
options hedging our net investments is reported in the cumulative translation
income tax effects of infrequent or unusual items are recognized in the interim
adjustment component of Accumulated other comprehensive income within
period in which they occur. As the fiscal year progresses, we continually refine
Total shareholders’ equity, to the extent effective, to offset the foreign
our estimate based upon actual events and earnings by jurisdiction during the
currency translation adjustments on those investments. As the value of our
year. This continual estimation process periodically results in a change to our
underlying net investments in wholly-owned international subsidiaries is
expected effective tax rate for the fiscal year. When this occurs, we adjust the
known at the time a hedge is placed, the designated hedge is matched to the
income tax provision during the quarter in which the change in estimate
portion of our net investment at risk. Accordingly, the variability involved in net
occurs.
investment hedges is substantially less than that of other types of hedge
transactions and we do not expect any material ineffectiveness. We consider, On a quarterly basis, we evaluate the probability that a tax position will be
on a quarterly basis, the need to redesignate existing hedge relationships effectively sustained and the appropriateness of the amount recognized for
based on changes in the underlying net investment. Should the level of our net uncertain tax positions based on factors including changes in facts or
investment decrease below hedged levels, the cumulative change in fair value circumstances, changes in tax law, settled audit issues and new audit activity.
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 93
Page#41
PART II
Changes in our assessment may result in the recognition of a tax benefit or an of multiple factors, including in some cases judgments about the potential
additional charge to the tax provision in the period our assessment changes. actions of third-party claimants and courts. Recorded contingent liabilities are
We recognize interest and penalties related to income tax matters in Income based on the best information available and actual losses in any future period
tax expense. are inherently uncertain. If future adjustments to estimated probable future
losses or actual losses exceed our recorded liability for such claims, we would
record additional charges during the period in which the actual loss or change
Other Contingencies in estimate occurred. In addition to contingent liabilities recorded for probable
losses, we disclose contingent liabilities when there is a reasonable possibility
In the ordinary course of business, we are involved in legal proceedings that the ultimate loss will materially exceed the recorded liability. While we
regarding contractual and employment relationships, product liability claims, cannot predict the outcome of pending legal matters with certainty, we do not
trademark rights and a variety of other matters. We record contingent liabilities believe any currently identified claim, proceeding or litigation, either individually
resulting from claims against us, including related legal costs, when a loss is or in aggregate, will have a material impact on our results of operations,
assessed to be probable and the amount of the loss is reasonably estimable. financial position or cash flows.
Assessing probability of loss and estimating probable losses requires analysis
94
Page#42
PART II
ITEM 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about
Market Risk
In the normal course of business and consistent with established policies and The timing for hedging exposures, as well as the type and duration of the
procedures, we employ a variety of financial instruments to manage exposure hedge instruments employed, are guided by our hedging policies and
to fluctuations in the value of foreign currencies and interest rates. It is our determined based upon the nature of the exposure and prevailing market
policy to utilize these financial instruments only where necessary to finance conditions. Typically, the Company may enter into hedge contracts starting
our business and manage such exposures; we do not enter into these up to 12 to 24 months in advance of the forecasted transaction and may
transactions for trading or speculative purposes. place incremental hedges up to 100% of the exposure by the time the
forecasted transaction occurs. The majority of derivatives outstanding as of
We are exposed to foreign currency fluctuations, primarily as a result of our
May 31, 2016 are designated as foreign currency cash flow hedges, primarily
international sales, product sourcing and funding activities. Our foreign
for Euro/U.S. Dollar, British Pound/Euro and Japanese Yen/U.S. Dollar
exchange risk management program is intended to lessen both the positive
currency pairs. See section “Foreign Currency Exposures and Hedging
and negative effects of currency fluctuations on our consolidated results of
Practices” under Item 7 for additional detail.
operations, financial position and cash flows. We use forward and option
contracts to hedge certain anticipated but not yet firmly committed Our earnings are also exposed to movements in short- and long-term market
transactions as well as certain firm commitments and the related receivables interest rates. Our objective in managing this interest rate exposure is to limit
and payables, including third-party and intercompany transactions. We have, the impact of interest rate changes on earnings and cash flows and to reduce
in the past, and may in the future, also use forward or options contracts to overall borrowing costs. To achieve these objectives, we maintain a mix of
hedge our investment in the net assets of certain international subsidiaries to commercial paper, bank loans, fixed-rate debt of varying maturities and have
offset foreign currency translation adjustments related to our net investment in entered into receive-fixed, pay-variable interest rate swaps for a portion of our
those subsidiaries. Where exposures are hedged, our program has the effect fixed-rate debt, as well as pay-fixed, receive-variable forward-starting interest
of delaying the impact of exchange rate movements on our Consolidated rate swaps for cash outflows of interest payments on future debt.
Financial Statements.
K
-
Market Risk Measurement 0
1
M
We monitor foreign exchange risk, interest rate risk and related derivatives The estimated maximum one-day loss in fair value on our foreign currency
R
using a variety of techniques including a review of market value, sensitivity sensitive derivative financial instruments, derived using the VaR model, was
O
analysis and Value-at-Risk (“VaR”). Our market-sensitive derivative and other $109 million and $117 million at May 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively. The
F
financial instruments are foreign currency forward contracts, foreign currency VaR decreased year-over-year as a result of a decrease in the total notional
option contracts, interest rate swaps, intercompany loans denominated in value of our foreign currency derivative portfolio at May 31, 2016. Such a
non-functional currencies, fixed interest rate U.S. Dollar denominated debt hypothetical loss in the fair value of our derivatives would be offset by
and fixed interest rate Japanese Yen denominated debt. increases in the value of the underlying transactions being hedged. The
average monthly change in the fair values of foreign currency forward and
We use VaR to monitor the foreign exchange risk of our foreign currency
foreign currency option derivative instruments was $209 million and $205
forward and foreign currency option derivative instruments only. The VaR
million during fiscal 2016 and fiscal 2015, respectively.
determines the maximum potential one-day loss in the fair value of these
The instruments not included in the VaR are intercompany loans
foreign exchange rate-sensitive financial instruments. The VaR model
denominated in non-functional currencies, fixed interest rate Japanese Yen
estimates assume normal market conditions and a 95% confidence level.
denominated debt, fixed interest rate U.S. Dollar denominated debt and
There are various modeling techniques that can be used in the VaR
interest rate swaps. Intercompany loans and related interest amounts are
computation. Our computations are based on interrelationships between
eliminated in consolidation. Furthermore, our non-functional currency
currencies and interest rates (a “variance/co-variance” technique). These
intercompany loans are substantially hedged against foreign exchange risk
interrelationships are a function of foreign exchange currency market changes
through the use of forward contracts, which are included in the VaR
and interest rate changes over the preceding one year period. The value of
calculation above. Therefore, we consider the interest rate and foreign
foreign currency options does not change on a one-to-one basis with
currency market risks associated with our non-functional currency
changes in the underlying currency rate. We adjust the potential loss in option
intercompany loans to be immaterial to our consolidated financial position,
value for the estimated sensitivity (the “delta” and “gamma”) to changes in the
results from operations and cash flows.
underlying currency rate. This calculation reflects the impact of foreign
currency rate fluctuations on the derivative instruments only and does not
During the year ended May 31, 2016, we entered into a series of forward-
include the impact of such rate fluctuations on non-functional currency
starting interest rate swap agreements. A forward-starting interest rate swap
transactions (such as anticipated transactions, firm commitments, cash
is an agreement that effectively hedges the variability in future benchmark
balances and accounts and loans receivable and payable), including those
interest payments attributable to changes in interest rates on the forecasted
which are hedged by these instruments.
issuance of fixed-rate debt. We entered into these forward-starting interest
rate swaps in order to lock in fixed interest rates on our forecasted issuance of
The VaR model is a risk analysis tool and does not purport to represent actual
debt. These instruments were designated as cash flow hedges of the
losses in fair value that we will incur nor does it consider the potential effect of
variability in the expected cash outflows of interest payments on future debt
favorable changes in market rates. It also does not represent the full extent of
due to changes in benchmark interest rates.
the possible loss that may occur. Actual future gains and losses will differ from
those estimated because of changes or differences in market rates and Details of third-party debt and interest rate swaps are provided in the table
interrelationships, hedging instruments and hedge percentages, timing and below. The table presents principal cash flows and related weighted average
other factors. interest rates by expected maturity dates.
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 95
Page#43
PART II
Expected Maturity Date
Year Ending May 31,
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Thereafter Total Fair Value
(Dollars in millions)
Foreign Exchange Risk
Japanese Yen Functional Currency
Long-term Japanese Yen debt — Fixed rate
Principal payments $ 6 $ 6 $ 6 $ 6 $ 3 $ — $ 27 $ 28
Average interest rate 2.4% 2.4% 2.4% 2.4% 2.4% 0.0% 2.4%
Interest Rate Risk
Japanese Yen Functional Currency
Long-term Japanese Yen debt — Fixed rate
Principal payments $ 6 $ 6 $ 6 $ 6 $ 3 $ — $ 27 $ 28
Average interest rate 2.4% 2.4% 2.4% 2.4% 2.4% 0.0% 2.4%
U.S. Dollar Functional Currency
Long-term U.S. Dollar debt — Fixed rate
Principal payments $ 38 $ — $ — $ — $ — $ 2,000 $2,038 $ 2,097
Average interest rate 6.2% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 3.4% 3.5%
Anticipated long-term U.S. Dollar debt
issuance — Floating rate swapped to fixed rate
Notional(1) $ 1,500 $ — $ — $ — $ — $ — $1,500 $ 38
Weighted-average fixed rate 2.2% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 2.2%
Weighted-average floating rate 0.7% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.7%
(1) Forward-starting interest rate swaps have been included in the maturities category based on when the related forecasted debt issuance and corresponding swap terminations are
expected to occur.
The fixed interest rate Japanese Yen denominated debt instruments were issued by and are accounted for by one of our Japanese subsidiaries. Accordingly, the
monthly translation of these instruments, which varies due to changes in foreign exchange rates, is recognized in Accumulated other comprehensive income
upon consolidation of this subsidiary.
ITEM 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Management of NIKE, Inc. is responsible for the information and An internal Corporate Audit department reviews the results of its work with the
representations contained in this report. The financial statements have been Audit Committee of the Board of Directors, presently consisting of four
prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the outside directors. The Audit Committee is responsible for the appointment of
United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”) and include certain amounts based the independent registered public accounting firm and reviews, with the
on our best estimates and judgments. Other financial information in this report independent registered public accounting firm, management and the internal
is consistent with these financial statements. audit staff, the scope and the results of the annual audit, the effectiveness of
the accounting control system and other matters relating to the financial
Our accounting systems include controls designed to reasonably assure
affairs of NIKE as the Audit Committee deems appropriate. The independent
assets are safeguarded from unauthorized use or disposition and provide for
registered public accounting firm and the internal auditors have full access to
the preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP. These
the Audit Committee, with and without the presence of management, to
systems are supplemented by the selection and training of qualified financial
discuss any appropriate matters.
personnel and an organizational structure providing for appropriate
segregation of duties.
96
Page#44
PART II
Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal of fraud. Controls are susceptible to manipulation, especially in instances of
control over financial reporting, as such term is defined in Rule 13(a)—15(f) fraud caused by the collusion of two or more people, including our senior
and Rule 15(d)-15(f) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. management. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future
Internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because
reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or
preparation of the financial statements for external purposes in accordance procedures may deteriorate.
with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America.
Under the supervision and with the participation of our Chief Executive Officer
Internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures
and Chief Financial Officer, our management conducted an evaluation of the
that: (i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail,
effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting based upon the
accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of assets of the
framework in Internal Control — Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the
Company; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission
necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with
(COSO). Based on the results of our evaluation, our management concluded
generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures
that our internal control over financial reporting was effective as of May 31,
of the Company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of our
2016.
management and directors; and (iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding
prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered public accounting
of assets of the Company that could have a material effect on the financial
firm, has audited (1) the Consolidated Financial Statements and (2) the
statements.
effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of May 31,
2016, as stated in their report herein.
While “reasonable assurance” is a high level of assurance, it does not mean
absolute assurance. Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over
financial reporting may not prevent or detect every misstatement and instance
Mark G. Parker Andrew Campion
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer Chief Financial Officer K
-
0
1
M
R
O
F
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 97
Page#45
PART II
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Board of Directors and Shareholders of NIKE, Inc.: financial reporting included obtaining an understanding of internal control over
financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists and
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements listed in the index
testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal
appearing under Item 15(a)(1) present fairly, in all material respects, the
control based on the assessed risk. Our audits also included performing such
financial position of NIKE, Inc. and its subsidiaries at May 31, 2016 and 2015,
other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We
and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the three
believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.
years in the period ended May 31, 2016 in conformity with accounting
principles generally accepted in the United States of America. In addition, in A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to
our opinion, the financial statement schedule listed in the index appearing provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting
under Item 15(a)(2) presents fairly, in all material respects, the information set and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in
forth therein when read in conjunction with the related consolidated financial accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s
statements. Also in our opinion, the Company maintained, in all material internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures
respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of May 31, 2016, that (i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail,
based on criteria established in Internal Control — Integrated Framework accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of
(2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the the company; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are
Treadway Commission (COSO). The Company’s management is responsible recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
for these financial statements and financial statement schedule, for accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts
maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with
assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide
included in Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
Reporting appearing under Item 8. Our responsibility is to express opinions on unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that
these financial statements, on the financial statement schedule and on the could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our integrated
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may
audits. We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the
not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may
standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable
become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of
assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material
compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
misstatement and whether effective internal control over financial reporting
was maintained in all material respects. Our audits of the financial statements
/ / P C LLP
S RICEWATERHOUSE OOPERS
included examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and
disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles Portland, Oregon
used and significant estimates made by management and evaluating the July 21, 2016
overall financial statement presentation. Our audit of internal control over
98
Page#46
PART II
NIKE, Inc. Consolidated Statements of Income
Year Ended May 31,
2016 2015 2014
(In millions, except per share data)
Revenues $ 32,376 $ 30,601 $ 27,799
Cost of sales 17,405 16,534 15,353
Gross profit 14,971 14,067 12,446
Demand creation expense 3,278 3,213 3,031
Operating overhead expense 7,191 6,679 5,735
Total selling and administrative expense 10,469 9,892 8,766
Interest expense (income), net 19 28 33
Other (income) expense, net (140) (58) 103
Income before income taxes 4,623 4,205 3,544
Income tax expense 863 932 851
NET INCOME $ 3,760 $ 3,273 $ 2,693
Earnings per common share:
Basic $ 2.21 $ 1.90 $ 1.52
Diluted $ 2.16 $ 1.85 $ 1.49
Dividends declared per common share $ 0.62 $ 0.54 $ 0.47
K
The accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements are an integral part of this statement. -
0
1
M
R
O
F
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 99
Page#47
PART II
NIKE, Inc. Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive
Income
Year Ended May 31,
2016 2015 2014
(In millions)
Net income $ 3,760 $ 3,273 $ 2,693
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax:
Change in net foreign currency translation adjustment(1) (176) (20) (32)
Change in net gains (losses) on cash flow hedges(2) (757) 1,188 (161)
Change in net gains (losses) on other(3) 5 (7) 4
Total other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax (928) 1,161 (189)
TOTAL COMPREHENSIVE INCOME $ 2,832 $ 4,434 $ 2,504
(1) Net of tax benefit (expense) of $0 million, $0 million and $0 million, respectively.
(2) Net of tax benefit (expense) of $35 million, $(31) million and $18 million, respectively.
(3) Net of tax benefit (expense) of $0 million, $0 million and $0 million, respectively.
The accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements are an integral part of this statement.
100
Page#48
PART II
NIKE, Inc. Consolidated Balance Sheets
May 31,
2016 2015
(In millions)
ASSETS
Current assets:
Cash and equivalents $ 3,138 $ 3,852
Short-term investments 2,319 2,072
Accounts receivable, net 3,241 3,358
Inventories 4,838 4,337
Prepaid expenses and other current assets 1,489 1,968
Total current assets 15,025 15,587
Property, plant and equipment, net 3,520 3,011
Identifiable intangible assets, net 281 281
Goodwill 131 131
Deferred income taxes and other assets 2,439 2,587
TOTAL ASSETS $ 21,396 $ 21,597
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Current liabilities:
Current portion of long-term debt $ 44 $ 107
Notes payable 1 74
K
Accounts payable 2,191 2,131 -
0
Accrued liabilities 3,037 3,949 1
Income taxes payable 85 71 M
Total current liabilities 5,358 6,332 R
O
Long-term debt 2,010 1,079
F
Deferred income taxes and other liabilities 1,770 1,479
Commitments and contingencies
Redeemable preferred stock — —
Shareholders’ equity:
Common stock at stated value:
Class A convertible — 353 and 355 shares outstanding — —
Class B — 1,329 and 1,357 shares outstanding 3 3
Capital in excess of stated value 7,786 6,773
Accumulated other comprehensive income 318 1,246
Retained earnings 4,151 4,685
Total shareholders’ equity 12,258 12,707
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY $ 21,396 $ 21,597
The accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements are an integral part of this statement.
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 101
Page#49
PART II
NIKE, Inc. Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
Year Ended May 31,
2016 2015 2014
(In millions)
Cash provided by operations:
Net income $ 3,760 $ 3,273 $ 2,693
Income charges (credits) not affecting cash:
Depreciation 649 606 518
Deferred income taxes (80) (113) (11)
Stock-based compensation 236 191 177
Amortization and other 13 43 68
Net foreign currency adjustments 98 424 56
Changes in certain working capital components and other assets and liabilities:
Decrease (increase) in accounts receivable 60 (216) (298)
(Increase) in inventories (590) (621) (505)
(Increase) in prepaid expenses and other current assets (161) (144) (210)
(Decrease) increase in accounts payable, accrued liabilities and income taxes payable (889) 1,237 525
Cash provided by operations 3,096 4,680 3,013
Cash used by investing activities:
Purchases of short-term investments (5,367) (4,936) (5,386)
Maturities of short-term investments 2,924 3,655 3,932
Sales of short-term investments 2,386 2,216 1,126
Investments in reverse repurchase agreements 150 (150) —
Additions to property, plant and equipment (1,143) (963) (880)
Disposals of property, plant and equipment 10 3 3
Decrease (increase) in other assets, net of other liabilities 6 — (2)
Cash used by investing activities (1,034) (175) (1,207)
Cash used by financing activities:
Net proceeds from long-term debt issuance 981 — —
Long-term debt payments, including current portion (106) (7) (60)
(Decrease) increase in notes payable (67) (63) 75
Payments on capital lease obligations (7) (19) (17)
Proceeds from exercise of stock options and other stock issuances 507 514 383
Excess tax benefits from share-based payment arrangements 281 218 132
Repurchase of common stock (3,238) (2,534) (2,628)
Dividends — common and preferred (1,022) (899) (799)
Cash used by financing activities (2,671) (2,790) (2,914)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and equivalents (105) (83) (9)
Net (decrease) increase in cash and equivalents (714) 1,632 (1,117)
Cash and equivalents, beginning of year 3,852 2,220 3,337
CASH AND EQUIVALENTS, END OF YEAR $ 3,138 $ 3,852 $ 2,220
Supplemental disclosure of cash flow information:
Cash paid during the year for:
Interest, net of capitalized interest $ 70 $ 53 $ 53
Income taxes 748 1,262 856
Non-cash additions to property, plant and equipment 252 206 167
Dividends declared and not paid 271 240 209
The accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements are an integral part of this statement.
102
Page#50
PART II
NIKE, Inc. Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity
Capital in Accumulated
Common Stock
Excess Other
Class A Class B
of Stated Comprehensive Retained
Shares Amount Shares Amount Value Income Earnings Total
(In millions, except per share data)
Balance at May 31, 2013 356 $ — 1,433 $ 3 $ 5,184 $ 274 $ 5,620 $ 11,081
Stock options exercised 22 445 445
Conversion to Class B Common Stock (1) — 1 — —
Repurchase of Class B Common Stock (73) (11) (2,617) (2,628)
Dividends on common stock ($0.47 per share) (821) (821)
Issuance of shares to employees 3 78 78
Stock-based compensation 177 177
Forfeiture of shares from employees (1) (8) (4) (12)
Net income 2,693 2,693
Other comprehensive income (loss) (189) (189)
Balance at May 31, 2014 355 $ — 1,385 $ 3 $ 5,865 $ 85 $ 4,871 $ 10,824
Stock options exercised 27 639 639
Repurchase of Class B Common Stock (58) (9) (2,525) (2,534)
Dividends on common stock ($0.54 per share) (931) (931)
Issuance of shares to employees 3 92 92
Stock-based compensation 191 191
K
Forfeiture of shares from employees — (5) (3) (8)
-
Net income 3,273 3,273 0
1
Other comprehensive income (loss) 1,161 1,161
M
Balance at May 31, 2015 355 $ — 1,357 $ 3 $ 6,773 $ 1,246 $ 4,685 $ 12,707
R
Stock options exercised 22 680 680
O
Conversion to Class B Common Stock (2) — 2 — —
F
Repurchase of Class B Common Stock (55) (8) (3,230) (3,238)
Dividends on common stock ($0.62 per share) (1,053) (1,053)
Issuance of shares to employees 3 115 115
Stock-based compensation 236 236
Forfeiture of shares from employees — (10) (11) (21)
Net income 3,760 3,760
Other comprehensive income (loss) (928) (928)
Balance at May 31, 2016 353 $ — 1,329 $ 3 $ 7,786 $ 318 $ 4,151 $ 12,258
The accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements are an integral part of this statement.
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 103
Page#51
PART II
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Note 1 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies 105
  
Note 2 Inventories 109
   
Note 3 Property, Plant and Equipment 109
  
Note 4 Identifiable Intangible Assets and Goodwill 109
  
Note 5 Accrued Liabilities 109
   
Note 6 Fair Value Measurements 110
   
Note 7 Short-Term Borrowings and Credit Lines 111
  
Note 8 Long-Term Debt 112
   
Note 9 Income Taxes 112
   
Note 10 Redeemable Preferred Stock 114
  
Note 11 Common Stock and Stock-Based Compensation 115
  
Note 12 Earnings Per Share 116
   
Note 13 Benefit Plans 116
   
Note 14 Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income 117
  
Note 15 Commitments and Contingencies 118
  
Note 16 Risk Management and Derivatives 118
  
Note 17 Operating Segments and Related Information 121
  
104
Page#52
PART II
NOTE 1 — Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Description of Business Cost of Sales
NIKE, Inc. is a worldwide leader in the design, development and worldwide Cost of sales consists primarily of inventory costs, as well as warehousing
marketing and selling of athletic footwear, apparel, equipment, accessories costs (including the cost of warehouse labor), third-party royalties, certain
and services. NIKE, Inc. portfolio brands include the NIKE Brand, Jordan foreign currency hedge gains and losses and research, design and
Brand, Hurley and Converse. The NIKE Brand is focused on performance development costs. Outbound shipping and handling costs are expensed as
athletic footwear, apparel, equipment, accessories and services across a incurred and included in Cost of sales.
wide range of sport categories, amplified with sport-inspired sportswear
products carrying the Swoosh trademark as well as other NIKE Brand
trademarks. The Jordan Brand is focused on athletic and casual footwear, Operating Overhead Expense
apparel and accessories, using the Jumpman trademark. Sales of Jordan
Brand products are reported as a separate category within the respective Operating overhead expense consists primarily of payroll and benefit related
NIKE Brand geographic operating segments. The Hurley brand is focused on costs, rent, depreciation and amortization, professional services and
surf and action sports and youth lifestyle footwear, apparel and accessories, meetings and travel.
using the Hurley trademark. Sales of Hurley brand products are included
within the NIKE Brand Action Sports category and within the NIKE Brand’s
Demand Creation Expense
North America geographic operating segment, respectively. Converse
designs, distributes, markets and sells casual sneakers, apparel and
Demand creation expense consists of advertising and promotion costs,
accessories under the Converse, Chuck Taylor, All Star, One Star, Star
including costs of endorsement contracts, television, digital and print
Chevron and Jack Purcell trademarks. In some markets outside the U.S.,
advertising, brand events and retail brand presentation. Advertising
these trademarks are licensed to third parties who design, distribute, market
production costs are expensed the first time an advertisement is run.
and sell similar products. Operating results of the Converse brand are
Advertising communication costs are expensed when the advertisement
reported on a stand-alone basis.
appears. Costs related to brand events are expensed when the event occurs.
K
Costs related to retail brand presentation are expensed when the
-
0
presentation is completed and delivered.
Basis of Consolidation
1
M
A significant amount of the Company’s promotional expenses result from
The Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts of NIKE, Inc.
payments under endorsement contracts. Accounting for endorsement R
and its subsidiaries (the “Company”). All significant intercompany transactions
payments is based upon specific contract provisions. Generally, O
and balances have been eliminated.
endorsement payments are expensed on a straight-line basis over the term of F
On November 19, 2015, the Company announced a two-for-one split of both the contract after giving recognition to periodic performance compliance
NIKE Class A and Class B Common Stock. The stock split was in the form of provisions of the contracts. Prepayments made under contracts are included
a 100 percent stock dividend payable on December 23, 2015 to shareholders in Prepaid expenses and other current assets or Deferred income taxes and
of record at the close of business on December 9, 2015. Common stock other assets depending on the period to which the prepayment applies.
began trading at the split-adjusted price on December 24, 2015. All share and
Certain contracts provide for contingent payments to endorsers based upon
per share amounts presented reflect the stock split.
specific achievements in their sports (e.g., winning a championship). The
Company records demand creation expense for these amounts when the
endorser achieves the specific goal.
Reclassifications
Certain contracts provide for variable payments based upon endorsers
Certain prior year amounts have been reclassified to conform to fiscal 2016
maintaining a level of performance in their sport over an extended period of
presentation.
time (e.g., maintaining a specified ranking in a sport for a year). When the
Company determines payments are probable, the amounts are reported in
Demand creation expense ratably over the contract period based on our best
Revenue Recognition
estimate of the endorser’s performance. In these instances, to the extent that
actual payments to the endorser differ from the Company’s estimate due to
Wholesale revenues are recognized when title and the risks and rewards of
changes in the endorser’s performance, increased or decreased demand
ownership have passed to the customer, based on the terms of sale. This
creation expense may be recorded in a future period.
occurs upon shipment or upon receipt by the customer depending on the
country of the sale and the agreement with the customer. Retail store Certain contracts provide for royalty payments to endorsers based upon a
revenues are recorded at the time of sale and online store revenues are predetermined percent of sales of particular products. The Company
recorded upon delivery to the customer. Provisions for post-invoice sales expenses these payments in Cost of sales as the related sales occur. In
discounts, returns and miscellaneous claims from customers are estimated certain contracts, the Company offers minimum guaranteed royalty
and recorded as a reduction to revenue at the time of sale. Post-invoice sales payments. For contracts for which the Company estimates it will not meet the
discounts consist of contractual programs with certain customers or minimum guaranteed amount of royalty fees through sales of product, the
discretionary discounts that are expected to be granted to certain customers Company records the amount of the guaranteed payment in excess of that
at a later date. Estimates of discretionary discounts, returns and claims are earned through sales of product in Demand creation expense uniformly over
based on (1) historical rates, (2) specific identification of outstanding claims the contract term.
and outstanding returns not yet received from customers and (3) estimated
Through cooperative advertising programs, the Company reimburses retail
discounts, returns and claims expected, but not yet finalized with
customers for certain costs of advertising the Company’s products. The
customers. As of May 31, 2016 and 2015, the Company’s reserve balances
Company records these costs in Demand creation expense at the point in
for post-invoice sales discounts, returns and miscellaneous claims were $789
time when it is obligated to its customers for the costs. This obligation may
million and $724 million, respectively.
arise prior to the related advertisement being run.
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 105
Page#53
PART II
Total advertising and promotion expenses were $3,278 million, $3,213 million Property, Plant and Equipment and
and $3,031 million for the years ended May 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014,
Depreciation
respectively. Prepaid advertising and promotion expenses totaled $540
million and $455 million at May 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively, and were
Property, plant and equipment are recorded at cost. Depreciation is
recorded in Prepaid expenses and other current assets and Deferred income
determined on a straight-line basis for buildings and leasehold improvements
taxes and other assets depending on the period to which the prepayment
over 2 to 40 years and for machinery and equipment over 2 to 15 years.
applies.
Depreciation and amortization of assets used in manufacturing, warehousing
and product distribution are recorded in Cost of sales. Depreciation and
Cash and Equivalents amortization of other assets are recorded in Operating overhead expense.
Cash and equivalents represent cash and short-term, highly liquid
investments, including commercial paper, U.S. Treasury, U.S. Agency, Software Development Costs
money market funds, time deposits and corporate debt securities with
maturities of 90 days or less at the date of purchase. Internal Use Software: Expenditures for major software purchases and
software developed for internal use are capitalized and amortized over a 2 to
10 year period on a straight-line basis. The Company’s policy provides for the
Short-Term Investments capitalization of external direct costs of materials and services associated with
developing or obtaining internal use computer software. In addition, the
Short-term investments consist of highly liquid investments, including Company also capitalizes certain payroll and payroll-related costs for
commercial paper, U.S. Treasury, U.S. Agency, time deposits and corporate employees who are directly associated with internal use computer software
debt securities, with maturities over 90 days at the date of purchase. Debt projects. The amount of capitalizable payroll costs with respect to these
securities that the Company has the ability and positive intent to hold to employees is limited to the time directly spent on such projects. Costs
maturity are carried at amortized cost. At May 31, 2016 and 2015, the associated with preliminary project stage activities, training, maintenance and
Company did not hold any short-term investments that were classified as all other post-implementation stage activities are expensed as incurred.
trading or held-to-maturity.
Computer Software to be Sold, Leased or Otherwise Marketed: Development
At May 31, 2016 and 2015, Short-term investments consisted of available- costs of computer software to be sold, leased or otherwise marketed as an
for-sale securities. Available-for-sale securities are recorded at fair value with integral part of a product are subject to capitalization beginning when a
unrealized gains and losses reported, net of tax, in Accumulated other product’s technological feasibility has been established and ending when a
comprehensive income, unless unrealized losses are determined to be other product is available for general release to customers. In most instances, the
than temporary. Realized gains and losses on the sale of securities are Company’s products are released soon after technological feasibility has
determined by specific identification. The Company considers all available- been established. Therefore, software development costs incurred
for-sale securities, including those with maturity dates beyond 12 months, as subsequent to achievement of technological feasibility are usually not
available to support current operational liquidity needs and therefore classifies significant, and generally most software development costs have been
all securities with maturity dates beyond 90 days at the date of purchase as expensed as incurred.
current assets within Short-term investments on the Consolidated Balance
Sheets.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Refer to Note 6 — Fair Value Measurements for more information on the
Company’s short-term investments.
The Company reviews the carrying value of long-lived assets or asset groups
to be used in operations whenever events or changes in circumstances
indicate that the carrying amount of the assets might not be recoverable.
Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts
Factors that would necessitate an impairment assessment include a
Receivable significant adverse change in the extent or manner in which an asset is used,
a significant adverse change in legal factors or the business climate that could
Accounts receivable, net consist primarily of amounts receivable from affect the value of the asset or a significant decline in the observable market
customers. The Company makes ongoing estimates relating to the value of an asset, among others. If such facts indicate a potential impairment,
collectability of its accounts receivable and maintains an allowance for the Company would assess the recoverability of an asset group by
estimated losses resulting from the inability of its customers to make required determining if the carrying value of the asset group exceeds the sum of the
payments. In determining the amount of the allowance, the Company projected undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and
considers historical levels of credit losses and makes judgments about the eventual disposition of the assets over the remaining economic life of the
creditworthiness of significant customers based on ongoing credit primary asset in the asset group. If the recoverability test indicates that the
evaluations. Accounts receivable with anticipated collection dates greater carrying value of the asset group is not recoverable, the Company will
than 12 months from the balance sheet date and related allowances are estimate the fair value of the asset group using appropriate valuation
considered non-current and recorded in Deferred income taxes and other methodologies, which would typically include an estimate of discounted cash
assets. The allowance for uncollectible accounts receivable was $43 million flows. Any impairment would be measured as the difference between the
and $78 million at May 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively, of which $17 million asset group’s carrying amount and its estimated fair value.
and $24 million, respectively, was classified as long-term and recorded in
Deferred income taxes and other assets.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
Inventory Valuation The Company performs annual impairment tests on goodwill and intangible
assets with indefinite lives in the fourth quarter of each fiscal year or when
Inventories are stated at lower of cost or market and valued on either an events occur or circumstances change that would, more likely than not,
average or specific identification cost basis. For inventories in transit that reduce the fair value of a reporting unit or an intangible asset with an indefinite
represent direct shipments to customers, the related inventory and cost of life below its carrying value. Events or changes in circumstances that may
sales are recognized on a specific identification basis. Inventory costs trigger interim impairment reviews include significant changes in business
primarily consist of product cost from the Company’s suppliers, as well as climate, operating results, planned investments in the reporting unit, planned
inbound freight, import duties, taxes, insurance and logistics and other divestitures or an expectation that the carrying amount may not be
handling fees. recoverable, among other factors. The Company may first assess qualitative
106
Page#54
PART II
factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a The levels of hierarchy are described below:
reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If, after assessing the totality of
(cid:129) Level 1: Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
events and circumstances, the Company determines that it is more likely than
not that the fair value of the reporting unit is greater than its carrying amount,
(cid:129) Level 2: Inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the asset or
the two-step impairment test is unnecessary. The two-step impairment test
liability, either directly or indirectly; these include quoted prices for similar
first requires the Company to estimate the fair value of its reporting units. If the
assets or liabilities in active markets and quoted prices for identical or similar
carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, the goodwill of that
assets or liabilities in markets that are not active.
reporting unit is potentially impaired and the Company proceeds to step two
(cid:129) Level 3: Unobservable inputs for which there is little or no market data
of the impairment analysis. In step two of the analysis, the Company
available, which require the reporting entity to develop its own assumptions.
measures and records an impairment loss equal to the excess of the carrying
value of the reporting unit’s goodwill over its implied fair value, if any.
The Company’s assessment of the significance of a particular input to the fair
value measurement in its entirety requires judgment and considers factors
The Company generally bases its measurement of the fair value of a reporting
specific to the asset or liability. Financial assets and liabilities are classified in
unit on a blended analysis of the present value of future discounted cash flows
their entirety based on the most conservative level of input that is significant to
and the market valuation approach. The discounted cash flows model
the fair value measurement.
indicates the fair value of the reporting unit based on the present value of the
cash flows that the Company expects the reporting unit to generate in the
Pricing vendors are utilized for certain Level 1 and Level 2 investments. These
future. The Company’s significant estimates in the discounted cash flows
vendors either provide a quoted market price in an active market or use
model include: its weighted average cost of capital; long-term rate of growth
observable inputs without applying significant adjustments in their pricing.
and profitability of the reporting unit’s business; and working capital effects.
Observable inputs include broker quotes, interest rates and yield curves
The market valuation approach indicates the fair value of the business based
observable at commonly quoted intervals, volatilities and credit risks. The fair
on a comparison of the reporting unit to comparable publicly traded
value of derivative contracts is determined using observable market inputs
companies in similar lines of business. Significant estimates in the market
such as the daily market foreign currency rates, forward pricing curves,
valuation approach model include identifying similar companies with
currency volatilities, currency correlations and interest rates and considers
comparable business factors such as size, growth, profitability, risk and return
nonperformance risk of the Company and that of its counterparties.
on investment and assessing comparable revenue and operating income
The Company’s fair value processes include controls that are designed to
multiples in estimating the fair value of the reporting unit.
ensure appropriate fair values are recorded. These controls include a
K
Indefinite-lived intangible assets primarily consist of acquired trade names and comparison of fair values to another independent pricing vendor.
-
trademarks. The Company may first perform a qualitative assessment to 0
Refer to Note 6 — Fair Value Measurements for additional information.
1
determine whether it is more likely than not that an indefinite-lived intangible
M
asset is impaired. If, after assessing the totality of events and circumstances,
the Company determines that it is more likely than not that the indefinite-lived R
Foreign Currency Translation and Foreign
O
intangible asset is not impaired, no quantitative fair value measurement is
Currency Transactions
F
necessary. If a quantitative fair value measurement calculation is required for
these intangible assets, the Company utilizes the relief-from-royalty method.
Adjustments resulting from translating foreign functional currency financial
This method assumes that trade names and trademarks have value to the
statements into U.S. Dollars are included in the foreign currency translation
extent that their owner is relieved of the obligation to pay royalties for the
adjustment, a component of Accumulated other comprehensive income in
benefits received from them. This method requires the Company to estimate
Total shareholders’ equity.
the future revenue for the related brands, the appropriate royalty rate and the
weighted average cost of capital.
The Company’s global subsidiaries have various assets and liabilities,
primarily receivables and payables, which are denominated in currencies
other than their functional currency. These balance sheet items are subject to
Operating Leases
re-measurement, the impact of which is recorded in Other (income) expense,
net, within the Consolidated Statements of Income.
The Company leases retail store space, certain distribution and warehouse
facilities, office space and other non-real estate assets under operating
Accounting for Derivatives and Hedging
leases. Operating lease agreements may contain rent escalation clauses,
renewal options, rent holidays or certain landlord incentives, including tenant
Activities
improvement allowances. Rent expense for non-cancelable operating leases
with scheduled rent increases or landlord incentives are recognized on a
The Company uses derivative financial instruments to reduce its exposure to
straight-line basis over the lease term, beginning with the effective lease
changes in foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates. All derivatives
commencement date, which is generally the date in which the Company
are recorded at fair value on the Consolidated Balance Sheets and changes in
takes possession of or controls the physical use of the property. Certain
the fair value of derivative financial instruments are either recognized in
leases also provide for contingent rent, which is determined as a percent of
Accumulated other comprehensive income (a component of Total
sales in excess of specified levels. A contingent rent liability is recognized
shareholders’ equity), Long-term debt or Net income depending on the
together with the corresponding rent expense when specified levels have
nature of the underlying exposure, whether the derivative is formally
been achieved or when the Company determines that achieving the specified
designated as a hedge and, if designated, the extent to which the hedge is
levels during the period is probable.
effective. The Company classifies the cash flows at settlement from
derivatives in the same category as the cash flows from the related hedged
items. For undesignated hedges and designated cash flow hedges, this is
Fair Value Measurements primarily within the Cash provided by operations component of the
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. For designated net investment
The Company measures certain financial assets and liabilities at fair value on a hedges, this is within the Cash used by investing activities component of the
recurring basis, including derivatives and available-for-sale securities. Fair Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. For the Company’s fair value
value is the price the Company would receive to sell an asset or pay to transfer hedges, which are interest rate swaps used to mitigate the change in fair value
a liability in an orderly transaction with a market participant at the of its fixed-rate debt attributable to changes in interest rates, the related cash
measurement date. The Company uses a three-level hierarchy established by flows from periodic interest payments are reflected within the Cash provided
the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) that prioritizes fair value by operations component of the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.
measurements based on the types of inputs used for the various valuation Refer to Note 16 — Risk Management and Derivatives for more information
techniques (market approach, income approach and cost approach). on the Company’s risk management program and derivatives.
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 107
Page#55
PART II
Stock-Based Compensation as non-current in a classified balance sheet. The Company elected to early
adopt ASU 2015-17 on a retrospective basis in the fourth quarter of fiscal
The Company estimates the fair value of options and stock appreciation rights 2016. The adoption of this standard reduced Total current assets by $389
granted under the NIKE, Inc. Stock Incentive Plan and employees’ purchase million, increased Deferred income taxes and other assets by $386 million and
rights under the Employee Stock Purchase Plans (“ESPPs”) using the Black- reduced Total current liabilities and Deferred income taxes and other liabilities
Scholes option pricing model. The Company recognizes this fair value, net of by $2 million and $1 million, respectively, on the Consolidated Balance Sheet
estimated forfeitures, as Operating overhead expense in the Consolidated as of May 31, 2015.
Statements of Income over the vesting period using the straight-line method.
Refer to Note 11 — Common Stock and Stock-Based Compensation for
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
more information on the Company’s stock-based compensation programs.
In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued an
accounting standards update that replaces existing revenue recognition
Income Taxes
guidance. The updated guidance requires companies to recognize revenue in
a way that depicts the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in
The Company accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability method.
an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be
This approach requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for
entitled in exchange for those goods or services. In addition, the new
the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the
standard requires that reporting companies disclose the nature, amount,
carrying amounts and the tax basis of assets and liabilities. The Company
timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from contracts with
records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount
customers. Based on the FASB’s decision in July 2015 to defer the effective
management believes is more likely than not to be realized. United States
date and to allow more flexibility with implementation, the new standard will be
income taxes are provided currently on financial statement earnings of non-
effective for the Company beginning June 1, 2018, with early application
U.S. subsidiaries that are expected to be repatriated. The Company
permitted. The new standard is required to be applied retrospectively to each
determines annually the amount of undistributed non-U.S. earnings to invest
prior reporting period presented or retrospectively with the cumulative effect
indefinitely in its non-U.S. operations.
of initially applying it recognized at the date of initial application. The Company
has not yet selected a transition method and is currently evaluating the effect
The Company recognizes a tax benefit from uncertain tax positions in the
the guidance will have on the Consolidated Financial Statements.
financial statements only when it is more likely than not that the position will be
sustained upon examination by relevant tax authorities. The Company
In January 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-01, Financial Instruments
recognizes interest and penalties related to income tax matters in Income tax
— Overall (Subtopic 825-10): Recognition and Measurement of Financial
expense.
Assets and Financial Liabilities. The updated guidance enhances the reporting
model for financial instruments, which includes amendments to address
Refer to Note 9 — Income Taxes for further discussion.
aspects of recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosure. The
update to the standard is effective for the Company beginning June 1, 2018.
The Company does not expect the adoption to have a material impact on the
Earnings Per Share
Consolidated Financial Statements.
Basic earnings per common share is calculated by dividing Net income by the
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842)
weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the year.
that replaces existing lease guidance. The new standard is intended to
Diluted earnings per common share is calculated by adjusting weighted
provide enhanced transparency and comparability by requiring lessees to
average outstanding shares, assuming conversion of all potentially dilutive
record right-of-use assets and corresponding lease liabilities on the balance
stock options and awards.
sheet. The new guidance will continue to classify leases as either finance or
operating, with classification affecting the pattern of expense recognition in
Refer to Note 12 — Earnings Per Share for further discussion.
the statement of income. The standard is effective for the Company beginning
June 1, 2019, with early application permitted. The new standard is required
Management Estimates to be applied with a modified retrospective approach to each prior reporting
period presented with optional practical expedients. The Company is
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted currently evaluating the effect the guidance will have on the Consolidated
accounting principles requires management to make estimates, including Financial Statements.
estimates relating to assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets
In March 2016, the FASB Issued ASU No. 2016-09, Compensation — Stock
and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of
Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Employee Share-Based
financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses
Payment Accounting. The updated guidance changes how companies
during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
account for certain aspects of share-based payment awards to employees,
including the accounting for income taxes, forfeitures and statutory tax
withholding requirements, as well as classification in the statement of cash
Recently Adopted Accounting Standards
flows. The update to the standard is effective for the Company beginning
June 1, 2017, with early application permitted. The Company is currently
In November 2015, the FASB issued ASU No. 2015-17, Income Taxes (Topic
evaluating the effect the guidance will have on the Consolidated Financial
740): Balance Sheet Classification of Deferred Taxes to simplify the
Statements.
presentation of deferred taxes in the statement of financial position. The
updated guidance requires that deferred tax assets and liabilities be classified
108
Page#56
PART II
NOTE 2 — Inventories
Inventory balances of $4,838 million and $4,337 million at May 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively, were substantially all finished goods.
NOTE 3 — Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment, net included the following:
As of May 31,
2016 2015
(In millions)
Land $ 286 $ 273
Buildings 1,467 1,250
Machinery, equipment and internal-use software 3,510 3,329
Leasehold improvements 1,338 1,150
Construction in process 437 350
Total property, plant and equipment, gross 7,038 6,352
Less accumulated depreciation 3,518 3,341
TOTAL PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT, NET $ 3,520 $ 3,011
Capitalized interest was not material for the years ended May 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014.
NOTE 4 — Identifiable Intangible Assets and Goodwill
K
Identifiable intangible assets, net consist of indefinite-lived trademarks, which are not subject to amortization, and acquired trademarks and other intangible -
0
assets, which are subject to amortization. Indefinite-lived trademarks were $281 million at May 31, 2016 and 2015. Acquired trademarks and other intangible
1
assets at May 31, 2016 and 2015 were $16 million and $17 million, respectively, and were fully amortized at the end of both periods. Goodwill was $131 million at
M
May 31, 2016 and 2015 of which $65 million was included in the Converse segment for the respective periods. The remaining amounts were included in Global
R
Brand Divisions for segment reporting purposes. There were no accumulated impairment balances for goodwill as of either period end.
O
F
NOTE 5 — Accrued Liabilities
Accrued liabilities included the following:
As of May 31,
2016 2015
(In millions)
Compensation and benefits, excluding taxes $ 943 $ 997
Endorsement compensation 393 388
Dividends payable 271 240
Import and logistics costs 198 207
Fair value of derivatives 162 162
Taxes other than income taxes payable 159 172
Advertising and marketing 119 117
Collateral received from counterparties to hedging instruments 105 968
Other(1) 687 698
TOTAL ACCRUED LIABILITIES $ 3,037 $ 3,949
(1) Other consists of various accrued expenses with no individual item accounting for more than 5% of the total Accrued liabilities balance at May 31, 2016 and 2015.
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 109
Page#57
PART II
NOTE 6 — Fair Value Measurements
The following tables present information about the Company’s financial assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis as of May 31, 2016 and
2015, and indicate the fair value hierarchy of the valuation techniques utilized by the Company to determine such fair value. Refer to Note 1 — Summary of
Significant Accounting Policies for additional detail regarding the Company’s fair value measurement methodology.
As of May 31, 2016
Assets at Fair Cash Short-term Other Long-term
Value Equivalents Investments Assets
(In millions)
Cash $ 774 $ 774 $ — $ —
Level 1:
U.S. Treasury securities 1,265 100 1,165 —
Level 2:
Time deposits 831 827 4 —
U.S. Agency securities 679 — 679 —
Commercial paper and bonds 733 262 471 —
Money market funds 1,175 1,175 — —
Total level 2 3,418 2,264 1,154 —
Level 3:
Non-marketable preferred stock 10 — — 10
TOTAL $ 5,467 $ 3,138 $ 2,319 $ 10
As of May 31, 2015
Assets at Fair Cash Short-term Other Long-term
Value Equivalents Investments Assets
(In millions)
Cash $ 615 $ 615 $ — $ —
Level 1:
U.S. Treasury securities 869 225 644 —
Level 2:
Time deposits 684 684 — —
U.S. Agency securities 976 110 866 —
Commercial paper and bonds 914 352 562 —
Money market funds 1,866 1,866 — —
Total level 2 4,440 3,012 1,428 —
Level 3:
Non-marketable preferred stock 8 — — 8
TOTAL $ 5,932 $ 3,852 $ 2,072 $ 8
The Company elects to record the gross assets and liabilities of its derivative latter of which would further offset against the Company’s derivative asset
financial instruments on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The Company’s balance (refer to Note 16 — Risk Management and Derivatives). Cash
derivative financial instruments are subject to master netting arrangements collateral received related to the Company’s credit related contingent features
that allow for the offset of assets and liabilities in the event of default or early is presented in the Cash provided by operations component of the
termination of the contract. Any amounts of cash collateral received related to Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. Any amounts of non-cash collateral
these instruments associated with the Company’s credit-related contingent received, such as securities, are not recorded on the Consolidated Balance
features are recorded in Cash and equivalents and Accrued liabilities, the Sheets pursuant to the accounting standards for non-cash collateral received.
The following tables present information about the Company’s derivative assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis as of May 31,
2016 and 2015, and indicate the level in the fair value hierarchy in which the Company classifies the fair value measurement.
As of May 31, 2016
Derivative Assets Derivative Liabilities
Other
Assets Other Long- Liabilities Other
at Fair Current term at Fair Accrued Long-term
Value Assets Assets Value Liabilities Liabilities
(In millions)
Level 2:
Foreign exchange forwards and options(1) $ 603 $ 487 $ 116 $ 145 $ 115 $ 30
Embedded derivatives 7 2 5 9 2 7
Interest rate swaps(2) 7 7 — 45 45 —
TOTAL $ 617 $ 496 $ 121 $ 199 $ 162 $ 37
(1) If the foreign exchange derivative instruments had been netted in the Consolidated Balance Sheets, the asset and liability positions each would have been reduced by $136 million as of
May 31, 2016. As of that date, the Company had received $105 million of cash collateral from various counterparties related to these foreign exchange derivative instruments. No amount
of collateral was posted on the Company’s derivative liability balance as of May 31, 2016.
(2) As of May 31, 2016, no amount of cash collateral had been received or posted on the derivative asset and liability balances related to the Company’s interest rate swaps.
110
Page#58
PART II
As of May 31, 2015
Derivative Assets Derivative Liabilities
Other
Assets Other Long- Liabilities Other
at Fair Current term at Fair Accrued Long-term
Value Assets Assets Value Liabilities Liabilities
(In millions)
Level 2:
Foreign exchange forwards and options(1) $ 1,554 $ 1,034 $ 520 $ 164 $ 160 $ 4
Embedded derivatives 7 2 5 11 2 9
Interest rate swaps(2) 78 78 — — — —
TOTAL $ 1,639 $ 1,114 $ 525 $ 175 $ 162 $ 13
(1) If the foreign exchange derivative instruments had been netted in the Consolidated Balance Sheets, the asset and liability positions each would have been reduced by $161 million as of
May 31, 2015. As of that date, the Company had received $900 million of cash collateral and $74 million of securities from various counterparties related to these foreign exchange
derivative instruments. No amount of collateral was posted on the Company’s derivative liability balance as of May 31, 2015.
(2) As of May 31, 2015, the Company had received $68 million of cash collateral related to its interest rate swaps.
Available-for-sale securities comprise investments in U.S. Treasury and portion of the Company’s portfolio. Changes in Level 3 investment assets
Agency securities, money market funds, corporate commercial paper and were immaterial during the years ended May 31, 2016 and 2015.
bonds. These securities are valued using market prices on both active
No transfers among the levels within the fair value hierarchy occurred during
markets (Level 1) and less active markets (Level 2). As of May 31, 2016, the
the years ended May 31, 2016 or 2015.
Company held $2,113 million of available-for-sale securities with maturity
dates within one year and $206 million with maturity dates over one year and
Derivative financial instruments include foreign exchange forwards and options,
less than five years within Short-term investments on the Consolidated
embedded derivatives and interest rate swaps. Refer to Note 16 — Risk
Balance Sheets. The gross realized gains and losses on sales of available-for-
Management and Derivatives for additional detail. For fair value information
sale securities were immaterial for the fiscal years ended May 31, 2016 and
regarding Notes payable and Long-term debt, refer to Note 7 — Short-Term
K
2015. Unrealized gains and losses on available-for-sale securities included in
Borrowings and Credit Lines and Note 8 — Long-Term Debt, respectively.
-
Other comprehensive income were immaterial as of May 31, 2016 and 2015.
0
The Company regularly reviews its available-for-sale securities for other-than- As of May 31, 2016 and May 31, 2015, assets or liabilities that were required 1
temporary impairment. For the years ended May 31, 2016 and 2015, the to be measured at fair value on a non-recurring basis were immaterial. M
Company did not consider its securities to be other-than-temporarily impaired
R
At May 31, 2015, the Company had $150 million of outstanding receivables
and accordingly, did not recognize any impairment losses. O
related to its investments in reverse repurchase agreements recorded within
F
Included in Interest expense (income), net was interest income related to the Prepaid expenses and other current assets on the Consolidated Balance
Company’s available-for-sale securities of $12 million, $6 million and $5 Sheets. The carrying amount of these agreements approximates their fair
million for the years ended May 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014, respectively. value based upon observable inputs other than quoted prices (Level 2). The
reverse repurchase agreements are fully collateralized. At May 31, 2016, there
The Company’s Level 3 assets comprise investments in certain non-
were no outstanding receivables related to investments in reverse repurchase
marketable preferred stock. These Level 3 investments are an immaterial
agreements.
NOTE 7 — Short-Term Borrowings and Credit Lines
Notes payable and interest-bearing accounts payable to Sojitz Corporation of America (“Sojitz America”) as of May 31, 2016 and 2015 are summarized below:
As of May 31,
2016 2015
Borrowings Interest Rate Borrowings Interest Rate
(Dollars in millions)
Notes payable:
U.S. operations $ — 0.00%(1) $ — 0.00%(1)
Non-U.S. operations 1 13.00%(1) 74 12.39%(1)
TOTAL NOTES PAYABLE $ 1 $ 74
Interest-bearing accounts payable:
Sojitz America $ 39 1.27% $ 78 0.98%
(1) Weighted average interest rate includes non-interest bearing overdrafts.
The carrying amounts reflected in the Consolidated Balance Sheets for Notes The interest rate on such accounts payable is the 60-day London Interbank
payable approximate fair value. Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) as of the beginning of the month of the invoice date,
plus 0.75%.
The Company purchases through Sojitz America certain NIKE Brand
products it acquires from non-U.S. suppliers. These purchases are for As of May 31, 2016 and 2015, the Company had no amounts outstanding
products sold in certain countries in the Company’s Emerging Markets under its $2 billion commercial paper program.
geographic operating segment and Canada, excluding products produced
On August 28, 2015, the Company entered into a committed credit facility
and sold in the same country. Accounts payable to Sojitz America are
agreement with a syndicate of banks which provides for up to $2 billion of
generally due up to 60 days after shipment of goods from the foreign port.
borrowings. The facility matures August 28, 2020, with a one year extension
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 111
Page#59
PART II
option prior to any anniversary of the closing date, provided that in no event committed credit facility, the Company must maintain certain financial ratios,
shall it extend beyond August 28, 2022. Based on the Company’s current among other things, with which the Company was in compliance at May 31,
long-term senior unsecured debt ratings of AA- and A1 from Standard and 2016. This facility replaces the prior $1 billion credit facility agreement entered
Poor’s Corporation and Moody’s Investor Services, respectively, the interest into on November 1, 2011, which would have matured November 1, 2017.
rate charged on any outstanding borrowings would be the prevailing LIBOR No amounts were outstanding under either committed credit facility as of
plus 0.455%. The facility fee is 0.045% of the total commitment. Under this May 31, 2016 or 2015.
NOTE 8 — Long-Term Debt
Long-term debt, net of unamortized premiums and discounts and swap fair value adjustments, comprises the following:
Book Value Outstanding
As of May 31,
Original Interest Interest
Principal Rate Payments 2016 2015
Scheduled Maturity (Dollars and Yen in millions)
Corporate Bond Payables:(1)
October 15, 2015(2) $ 100 5.15% Semi-Annually $ — $ 101
May 1, 2023(3) $ 500 2.25% Semi-Annually 499 499
May 1, 2043(3) $ 500 3.63% Semi-Annually 499 499
November 1, 2045(4) $ 1,000 3.88% Semi-Annually 991 —
Promissory Notes:
April 1, 2017(5) $ 40 6.20% Monthly 38 39
January 1, 2018(5) $ 19 6.79% Monthly — 19
Japanese Yen Notes:
August 20, 2001 through November 20, 2020(6) ¥ 9,000 2.60% Quarterly 18 20
August 20, 2001 through November 20, 2020(6) ¥ 4,000 2.00% Quarterly 9 9
Total 2,054 1,186
Less current maturities 44 107
TOTAL LONG-TERM DEBT $ 2,010 $ 1,079
(1) These senior unsecured obligations rank equally with the Company’s other unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness.
(2) The Company has entered into interest rate swap agreements whereby the Company receives fixed interest payments at the same rate as the note and pays variable interest payments
based on the six-month LIBOR plus a spread. The swaps have the same notional amount and maturity date as the corresponding note. On October 15, 2015, the Company repaid the
long-term debt which had previously been hedged with these interest rate swaps. Accordingly, as of May 31, 2016, the Company had no interest rate swaps designated as fair value
hedges.
(3) The bonds are redeemable at the Company’s option prior to February 1, 2023 and November 1, 2042, respectively, at a price equal to the greater of (i) 100% of the aggregate principal
amount of the notes to be redeemed or (ii) the sum of the present values of the remaining scheduled payments, plus in each case, accrued and unpaid interest. Subsequent to February 1,
2023 and November 1, 2042, respectively, the bonds also feature a par call provision, which allows for the bonds to be redeemed at a price equal to 100% of the aggregate principal
amount of the notes being redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest.
(4) The bonds are redeemable at the Company’s option prior to May 1, 2045, at a price equal to the greater of (i) 100% of the aggregate principal amount of the notes to be redeemed or (ii) the
sum of the present values of the remaining scheduled payments, plus in each case, accrued and unpaid interest. Subsequent to May 1, 2045, the bonds also feature a par call provision,
which allows for the bonds to be redeemed at a price equal to 100% of the aggregate principal amount of the notes being redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest.
(5) The Company assumed a total of $59 million in bonds payable as part of its agreement to purchase certain Corporate properties; this was treated as a non-cash financing transaction. The
property serves as collateral for the debt. The purchase of these properties was accounted for as a business combination where the total consideration of $85 million was allocated to the
land and buildings acquired; no other tangible or intangible assets or liabilities resulted from the purchase. The bonds mature in 2017 and 2018 and the Company does not have the ability
to re-negotiate the terms of the debt agreements and would incur significant financial penalties if the notes were paid-off prior to maturity. During the year ended May 31, 2016, the notes
due January 1, 2018 were legally defeased and an insignificant loss on defeasance was recognized.
(6) NIKE Logistics YK assumed a total of ¥13.0 billion in loans as part of its agreement to purchase a distribution center in Japan, which serves as collateral for the loans. These loans mature in
equal quarterly installments during the period August 20, 2001 through November 20, 2020.
The scheduled maturity of Long-term debt in each of the years ending quoted prices for similar instruments or quoted prices for identical instruments
May 31, 2017 through 2021 are $44 million, $6 million, $6 million, $6 million in inactive markets (Level 2). The fair value of the Company’s Long-term debt,
and $3 million, respectively, at face value. including the current portion, was approximately $2,125 million at May 31,
2016 and $1,160 million at May 31, 2015.
The Company’s Long-term debt is recorded at adjusted cost, net of
unamortized premiums and discounts and interest rate swap fair value
adjustments. The fair value of Long-term debt is estimated based upon
NOTE 9 — Income Taxes
Income before income taxes is as follows:
Year Ended May 31,
2016 2015 2014
(In millions)
Income before income taxes:
United States $ 956 $ 1,967 $ 3,066
Foreign 3,667 2,238 478
TOTAL INCOME BEFORE INCOME TAXES $ 4,623 $ 4,205 $ 3,544
112
Page#60
PART II
The provision for income taxes is as follows:
Year Ended May 31,
2016 2015 2014
(In millions)
Current:
United States
Federal $ 304 $ 596 $ 259
State 71 80 104
Foreign 568 369 499
Total 943 1,045 862
Deferred:
United States
Federal (57) (66) 19
State (16) (11) (3)
Foreign (7) (36) (27)
Total (80) (113) (11)
TOTAL INCOME TAX EXPENSE $ 863 $ 932 $ 851
A reconciliation from the U.S. statutory federal income tax rate to the effective income tax rate is as follows:
Year Ended May 31,
2016 2015 2014
Federal income tax rate 35.0% 35.0% 35.0%
State taxes, net of federal benefit 1.1% 0.9% 1.8%
Foreign earnings -18.6% -15.7% 2.2%
K
Deferred charge 0.4% 0.9% -14.6%
-
0
Other, net 0.8% 1.1% -0.4%
1
EFFECTIVE INCOME TAX RATE 18.7% 22.2% 24.0%
M
R
The effective tax rate for the year ended May 31, 2016 was 350 basis points The effective tax rate for the year ended May 31, 2015 was 180 basis points
O
lower than the effective tax rate for the year ended May 31, 2015 primarily due lower than the effective tax rate for the year ended May 31, 2014 primarily due
F
to an increase in the proportion of earnings from operations outside of the to the favorable resolution of audits in several jurisdictions.
United States, which are generally subject to a lower tax rate.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities comprise the following:
As of May 31,
2016 2015
(In millions)
Deferred tax assets:
Allowance for doubtful accounts $ 5 $ 11
Inventories 88 59
Sales return reserves 182 143
Deferred compensation 274 258
Stock-based compensation 206 179
Reserves and accrued liabilities 78 92
Net operating loss carry-forwards 44 10
Undistributed earnings of foreign subsidiaries 179 149
Other 72 76
Total deferred tax assets 1,128 977
Valuation allowance (52) (9)
Total deferred tax assets after valuation allowance 1,076 968
Deferred tax liabilities:
Property, plant and equipment (268) (220)
Intangibles (92) (93)
Other (4) (38)
Total deferred tax liability (364) (351)
NET DEFERRED TAX ASSET $ 712 $ 617
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 113
Page#61
PART II
The following is a reconciliation of the changes in the gross balance of unrecognized tax benefits:
As of May 31,
2016 2015 2014
(In millions)
Unrecognized tax benefits, beginning of the period $ 438 $ 506 $ 447
Gross increases related to prior period tax positions(1) 49 32 814
Gross decreases related to prior period tax positions(1) (20) (123) (166)
Gross increases related to current period tax positions 81 82 125
Gross decreases related to current period tax positions — (9) (30)
Settlements(1) (13) (27) (676)
Lapse of statute of limitations (17) (10) (4)
Changes due to currency translation (12) (13) (4)
UNRECOGNIZED TAX BENEFITS, END OF THE PERIOD $ 506 $ 438 $ 506
(1) During the fourth quarter of the fiscal year ended May 31, 2014, the Company reached a resolution with the IRS on a U.S. Unilateral Advanced Pricing Agreement that covers intercompany
transfer pricing for fiscal years 2011 through 2020. As a result, the Company recorded a gross increase in unrecognized tax benefits related to prior period tax positions, a gross decrease
in unrecognized tax benefits related to prior period tax positions and a settlement. The net impact of these items resulted in a decrease to unrecognized tax benefits.
As of May 31, 2016, total gross unrecognized tax benefits, excluding related The Company’s major foreign jurisdictions, China and the Netherlands, have
interest and penalties, were $506 million, $290 million of which would affect concluded substantially all income tax matters through calendar 2005 and
the Company’s effective tax rate if recognized in future periods. fiscal 2010, respectively. Although the timing of resolution of audits is not
certain, the Company evaluates all domestic and foreign audit issues in the
The Company recognizes interest and penalties related to income tax matters
aggregate, along with the expiration of applicable statutes of limitations, and
in Income tax expense. The liability for payment of interest and penalties
estimates that it is reasonably possible the total gross unrecognized tax
increased by $45 million during the year ended May 31, 2016, decreased by
benefits could decrease by up to $92 million within the next 12 months.
$3 million during the year ended May 31, 2015 and increased by $55 million
during the year ended May 31, 2014. As of May 31, 2016 and 2015, accrued The Company provides for U.S. income taxes on the undistributed earnings
interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions were $209 million and of foreign subsidiaries unless they are considered indefinitely reinvested
$164 million, respectively (excluding federal benefit). outside the United States. At May 31, 2016, the indefinitely reinvested
earnings in foreign subsidiaries upon which United States income taxes have
The Company incurs tax liabilities primarily in the United States, China and the
not been provided were approximately $10.7 billion. If these undistributed
Netherlands, as well as various state and other foreign jurisdictions. The
earnings were repatriated to the United States or if the shares of the relevant
Company is currently under audit by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”)
foreign subsidiaries were sold or otherwise transferred, they would generate
for fiscal years 2013 through 2015. The Company has closed all U.S. federal
foreign tax credits that would reduce the federal tax liability associated with
income tax matters through fiscal 2012, with the exception of the validation of
the foreign dividend or the otherwise taxable transaction. Assuming a full
foreign tax credits utilized. During the year ended May 31, 2016, the
utilization of the foreign tax credits, the potential net deferred tax liability
Company received from the IRS a statutory notice of deficiency for fiscal
associated with these temporary differences of undistributed earnings would
2012, proposing an increase in tax of $223 million, subject to interest, related
be approximately $3.6 billion at May 31, 2016.
to the foreign tax credit matter. The Company intends to contest this
deficiency notice. As previously disclosed, the Company received a statutory A portion of the Company’s foreign operations are benefiting from a tax
notice of deficiency for fiscal 2011, proposing an increase in tax of $31 million, holiday, which is set to expire in 2021. This tax holiday may be extended when
subject to interest, related to the foreign tax credit matter. This notice also certain conditions are met or may be terminated early if certain conditions are
reported a decrease in foreign tax credit carryovers for fiscal 2010 and 2011. not met. The impact of this tax holiday decreased foreign taxes by $173
The Company has contested this deficiency notice by filing a petition with the million, $174 million and $138 million for the fiscal years ended May 31, 2016,
U.S Tax Court in April 2015. The Company does not expect the outcome of 2015 and 2014, respectively. The benefit of the tax holiday on diluted
this matter to have a material impact on the financial statements. No earnings per common share was $0.10, $0.10 and $0.08 for the fiscal years
payments on the assessment would be required until the dispute is definitively ended May 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014, respectively.
resolved. Based on the information currently available, the Company does not
Deferred tax assets at May 31, 2016 and 2015 were reduced by a valuation
anticipate a significant increase or decrease to its unrecognized tax benefits
allowance relating to tax benefits of certain subsidiaries with operating losses.
for this matter within the next 12 months.
There was a $43 million net increase in the valuation allowance for the year
ended May 31, 2016, compared to no net change and a net increase of $4
million for the years ended May 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively.
The Company has available domestic and foreign loss carry-forwards of $143 million at May 31, 2016. Such losses will expire as follows:
Year Ending May 31,
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021-2035 Indefinite Total
(In millions)
Net operating losses $ 1 $ 4 $ 1 $ 1 $ 35 $ 101 $ 143
During the years ended May 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014, income tax benefits attributable to employee stock-based compensation transactions of $281 million,
$224 million and $135 million, respectively, were allocated to Total shareholders’ equity.
NOTE 10 — Redeemable Preferred Stock
Sojitz America is the sole owner of the Company’s authorized redeemable redeemable preferred stock, Sojitz America does not have general voting
preferred stock, $1 par value, which is redeemable at the option of Sojitz rights, but does have the right to vote as a separate class on the sale of all or
America or the Company at par value aggregating $0.3 million. A cumulative substantially all of the assets of the Company and its subsidiaries, on merger,
dividend of $0.10 per share is payable annually on May 31 and no dividends consolidation, liquidation or dissolution of the Company or on the sale or
may be declared or paid on the common stock of the Company unless assignment of the NIKE trademark for athletic footwear sold in the United
dividends on the redeemable preferred stock have been declared and paid in States. The redeemable preferred stock has been fully issued to Sojitz
full. There have been no changes in the redeemable preferred stock in the America and is not blank check preferred stock. The Company’s articles of
three years ended May 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014. As the holder of the incorporation do not permit the issuance of additional preferred stock.
114
Page#62
PART II
NOTE 11 — Common Stock and Stock-Based Compensation
The authorized number of shares of Class A Common Stock, no par value, of non-statutory stock options, incentive stock options, stock appreciation
and Class B Common Stock, no par value, are 400 million and 2,400 million, rights, restricted stock, restricted stock units and performance-based
respectively. Each share of Class A Common Stock is convertible into one awards. The exercise price for stock options and stock appreciation rights
share of Class B Common Stock. Voting rights of Class B Common Stock are may not be less than the fair market value of the underlying shares on the date
limited in certain circumstances with respect to the election of directors. There of grant. A committee of the Board of Directors administers the Stock
are no differences in the dividend and liquidation preferences or participation Incentive Plan. The committee has the authority to determine the employees
rights of the Class A and Class B common shareholders. to whom awards will be made, the amount of the awards and the other terms
and conditions of the awards. Substantially all stock option grants
The NIKE, Inc. Stock Incentive Plan (the “Stock Incentive Plan”) provides for
outstanding under the Stock Incentive Plan are granted in the first quarter of
the issuance of up to 718 million previously unissued shares of Class B
each fiscal year, vest ratably over four years and expire ten years from the
Common Stock in connection with stock options and other awards granted
date of grant.
under the Stock Incentive Plan. The Stock Incentive Plan authorizes the grant
The following table summarizes the Company’s total stock-based compensation expense recognized in Operating overhead expense:
Year Ended May 31,
2016 2015 2014
(In millions)
Stock options(1) $ 171 $ 136 $ 125
ESPPs 31 24 22
Restricted stock 34 31 30
TOTAL STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION EXPENSE $ 236 $ 191 $ 177
(1) Expense for stock options includes the expense associated with stock appreciation rights. Accelerated stock option expense is recorded for employees eligible for accelerated stock option
vesting upon retirement. Accelerated stock option expense for the years ended May 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014 was $30 million, $19 million and $15 million, respectively.
As of May 31, 2016, the Company had $245 million of unrecognized compensation costs from stock options, net of estimated forfeitures, to be recognized in
K
Operating overhead expense over a weighted average period of 2.0 years. -
0
1
The weighted average fair value per share of the options granted during the years ended May 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014, as computed using the Black-Scholes
M
pricing model, was $12.66, $8.48 and $7.45, respectively. The weighted average assumptions used to estimate these fair values are as follows:
R
O
Year Ended May 31,
F
2016 2015 2014
Dividend yield 1.0% 1.2% 1.3%
Expected volatility 23.6% 23.6% 27.9%
Weighted average expected life (in years) 5.8 5.8 5.3
Risk-free interest rate 1.7% 1.7% 1.3%
The Company estimates the expected volatility based on the implied volatility exercise patterns. The interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury (constant
in market traded options on the Company’s common stock with a term maturity) risk-free rate in effect at the date of grant for periods corresponding
greater than 1 year, along with other factors. The weighted average expected with the expected term of the options.
life of options is based on an analysis of historical and expected future
The following summarizes the stock option transactions under the plan discussed above:
Weighted Average
Shares(1) Option Price
(In millions)
Options outstanding May 31, 2013 135.3 $ 17.36
Exercised (22.0) 14.15
Forfeited (2.5) 24.17
Granted 16.3 31.77
Options outstanding May 31, 2014 127.1 19.64
Exercised (27.2) 15.39
Forfeited (2.1) 29.51
Granted 18.4 38.84
Options outstanding May 31, 2015 116.2 23.50
Exercised (22.5) 17.75
Forfeited (2.3) 39.96
Granted 20.6 56.41
Options outstanding May 31, 2016 112.0 $ 30.38
Options exercisable at May 31,
2014 74.0 $ 15.71
2015 68.6 18.26
2016 66.5 21.48
(1) Includes stock appreciation rights transactions.
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 115
Page#63
PART II
The weighted average contractual life remaining for options outstanding and From time to time, the Company grants restricted stock and restricted stock
options exercisable at May 31, 2016 was 6.0 years and 4.6 years, units to key employees under the Stock Incentive Plan. The number of shares
respectively. The aggregate intrinsic value for options outstanding and underlying such awards granted to employees during the years ended
exercisable at May 31, 2016 was $2,806 million and $2,242 million, May 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014 were 1 million, 0.5 million and 0.6 million,
respectively. The aggregate intrinsic value was the amount by which the respectively, with weighted average values per share of $54.87, $39.69 and
market value of the underlying stock exceeded the exercise price of the $31.94, respectively. Recipients of restricted stock are entitled to cash
options. The total intrinsic value of the options exercised during the years dividends and to vote their respective shares throughout the period of
ended May 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014 was $946 million, $795 million and restriction. Recipients of restricted stock units are entitled to dividend
$474 million, respectively. equivalent cash payments upon vesting. The value of all grants of restricted
stock and restricted stock units was established by the market price on the
In addition to the Stock Incentive Plan, the Company gives employees the
date of grant. During the years ended May 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014, the
right to purchase shares at a discount to the market price under employee
aggregate fair value of restricted stock and restricted stock units vested was
stock purchase plans (“ESPPs”). Employees are eligible to participate through
$49 million, $20 million and $28 million, respectively, determined as of the
payroll deductions of up to 10% of their compensation. At the end of each 6-
date of vesting. As of May 31, 2016, the Company had $62 million of
month offering period, shares are purchased by the participants at 85% of the
unrecognized compensation costs from restricted stock and restricted stock
lower of the fair market value at the beginning or the end of the offering period.
units to be recognized in Operating overhead expense over a weighted
Employees purchased 2.5 million, 2.7 million and 2.8 million shares during
average period of 2.8 years.
each of the three years ended May 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014, respectively.
NOTE 12 — Earnings Per Share
The following is a reconciliation from basic earnings per common share to diluted earnings per common share. The computations of diluted earnings per common
share excluded options, including shares under employee stock purchase plans (“ESPPs”), to purchase an additional 0.2 million, 1.7 million and 1.5 million shares
of common stock outstanding for the years ended May 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014, respectively, because the options were anti-dilutive.
Year Ended May 31,
2016 2015 2014
(In millions, except per share data)
Determination of shares:
Weighted average common shares outstanding 1,697.9 1,723.5 1,766.7
Assumed conversion of dilutive stock options and awards 44.6 45.3 44.9
DILUTED WEIGHTED AVERAGE COMMON SHARES OUTSTANDING 1,742.5 1,768.8 1,811.6
Earnings per common share:
Basic $ 2.21 $ 1.90 $ 1.52
Diluted $ 2.16 $ 1.85 $ 1.49
NOTE 13 — Benefit Plans
The Company has a qualified 401(k) Savings and Profit Sharing Plan, in which million and $46 million of Operating overhead expense related to cash awards
all U.S. employees are able to participate. The Company matches a portion of under the LTIP during the years ended May 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014,
employee contributions to the savings plan. Company contributions to the respectively.
savings plan were $72 million, $58 million and $51 million and included in
The Company allows certain highly compensated employees and non-
Operating overhead expense for the years ended May 31, 2016, 2015 and
employee directors of the Company to defer compensation under a
2014, respectively. The terms of the plan also allow for annual discretionary
nonqualified deferred compensation plan. Deferred compensation plan
profit sharing contributions, as determined by the Board of Directors, to the
liabilities were $475 million and $443 million at May 31, 2016 and 2015,
accounts of eligible U.S. employees who work at least 1,000 hours in a year.
respectively, and primarily classified as long-term in Deferred income taxes
Profit sharing contributions of $64 million, $58 million and $49 million were
and other liabilities.
made to the plan and included in Operating overhead expense for the years
ended May 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014, respectively.
The Company has pension plans in various countries worldwide. The pension
plans are only available to local employees and are generally government
The Company also has a Long-Term Incentive Plan (“LTIP”) that was adopted
mandated. The liability related to the unfunded pension liabilities of the plans
by the Board of Directors and approved by shareholders in September 1997
was $93 million and $98 million at May 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively, and
and later amended in fiscal 2007. The Company recognized $85 million, $68
primarily classified as long-term in Deferred income taxes and other liabilities.
116
Page#64
PART II
NOTE 14 — Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
The changes in Accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax, were as follows:
Foreign
Currency
Translation Cash Flow Net Investment
(In millions) Adjustment(1)(2) Hedges Hedges(1)(2) Other Total
Balance at May 31, 2015 $ (31) $ 1,220 $ 115 $ (58) $ 1,246
Other comprehensive gains (losses) before reclassifications(3) (178) (47) — 6 (219)
Reclassifications to net income of previously deferred (gains) losses(4) 2 (710) — (1) (709)
Other comprehensive income (loss) (176) (757) — 5 (928)
Balance at May 31, 2016 $ (207) $ 463 $ 115 $ (53) $ 318
(1) The accumulated foreign currency translation adjustment and net investment hedge gains/losses related to an investment in a foreign subsidiary are reclassified to Net income upon sale or
upon complete or substantially complete liquidation of the respective entity.
(2) Beginning balances have been updated to reflect the proper classification of $20 million of deferred tax balances between Foreign Currency Translation Adjustment and Net Investment
Hedges.
(3) Net of tax benefit (expense) of $0 million, $28 million, $0 million, $(2) million and $26 million, respectively.
(4) Net of tax (benefit) expense of $0 million, $7 million, $0 million, $2 million and $9 million, respectively.
Foreign
Currency
Translation Cash Flow Net Investment
(In millions) Adjustment(1)(2) Hedges Hedges(1)(2) Other Total
Balance at May 31, 2014 $ (11) $ 32 $ 115 $ (51) $ 85
Other comprehensive gains (losses) before reclassifications(3) (20) 1,447 — 33 1,460
Reclassifications to net income of previously deferred (gains) losses(4) — (259) — (40) (299) K
-
Other comprehensive income (loss) (20) 1,188 — (7) 1,161
0
Balance at May 31, 2015 $ (31) $ 1,220 $ 115 $ (58) $ 1,246 1
M
(1) The accumulated foreign currency translation adjustment and net investment hedge gains/losses related to an investment in a foreign subsidiary are reclassified to Net income upon sale or
R
upon complete or substantially complete liquidation of the respective entity.
O
(2) Beginning and ending balances have been updated to reflect the proper classification of $20 million of deferred tax balances between Foreign Currency Translation Adjustment and Net
F
Investment Hedges.
(3) Net of tax benefit (expense) of $0 million, $(33) million, $0 million, $0 million and $(33) million, respectively.
(4) Net of tax (benefit) expense of $0 million, $2 million, $0 million, $0 million and $2 million, respectively.
The following table summarizes the reclassifications from Accumulated other comprehensive income to the Consolidated Statements of Income:
Amount of Gain (Loss)
Reclassified from Accumulated
Other Comprehensive Income
into Income
Location of Gain (Loss) Reclassified from
Year Ended May 31,
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
2016 2015 into Income
(In millions)
Gains (losses) on foreign currency translation adjustment $ (2) $ — Other (income) expense, net
Total before tax (2) —
Tax (expense) benefit — —
Gain (loss) net of tax (2) —
Gains (losses) on cash flow hedges:
Foreign exchange forwards and options (88) (95) Revenues
Foreign exchange forwards and options 586 220 Cost of sales
Foreign exchange forwards and options — — Total selling and administrative expense
Foreign exchange forwards and options 219 136 Other (income) expense, net
Total before tax 717 261
Tax (expense) benefit (7) (2)
Gain (loss) net of tax 710 259
Gains (losses) on other 3 40 Other (income) expense, net
Total before tax 3 40
Tax (expense) benefit (2) —
Gain (loss) net of tax 1 40
Total net gain (loss) reclassified for the period $ 709 $ 299
Refer to Note 16 — Risk Management and Derivatives for more information on the Company’s risk management program and derivatives.
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 117
Page#65
PART II
NOTE 15 — Commitments and Contingencies
The Company leases retail store space, certain distribution and warehouse facilities, and office space and other non-real estate assets under operating leases
expiring from 1 to 18 years after May 31, 2016. Rent expense was $661 million, $594 million and $533 million for the years ended May 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014,
respectively. Amounts of minimum future annual commitments under non-cancelable operating and capital leases are as follows (in millions):
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Thereafter Total
Operating leases $ 491 $ 453 $ 395 $ 347 $ 301 $ 1,244 $ 3,231
Capital leases $ 7 $ 5 $ 2 $ 1 $ — $ — $ 15
As of May 31, 2016 and 2015, the Company had letters of credit outstanding determined that the fair value of such indemnification is not material to the
totaling $157 million and $165 million, respectively. These letters of credit Company’s financial position or results of operations.
were generally issued for the purchase of inventory and guarantees of the
In the ordinary course of its business, the Company is involved in various legal
Company’s performance under certain self-insurance and other programs.
proceedings involving contractual and employment relationships, product
In connection with various contracts and agreements, the Company provides liability claims, trademark rights and a variety of other matters. While the
routine indemnification relating to the enforceability of intellectual property Company cannot predict the outcome of its pending legal matters with
rights, coverage for legal issues that arise and other items where the certainty, the Company does not believe any currently identified claim,
Company is acting as the guarantor. Currently, the Company has several proceeding or litigation, either individually or in aggregate, will have a material
such agreements in place. However, based on the Company’s historical impact on the Company’s results of operations, financial position or cash
experience and the estimated probability of future loss, the Company has flows.
NOTE 16 — Risk Management and Derivatives
The Company is exposed to global market risks, including the effect of strategies for undertaking hedge transactions. This process includes linking all
changes in foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates, and uses derivatives designated as hedges to either recognized assets or liabilities or
derivatives to manage financial exposures that occur in the normal course of forecasted transactions.
business. The Company does not hold or issue derivatives for trading or
The majority of derivatives outstanding as of May 31, 2016 are designated as
speculative purposes.
foreign currency cash flow hedges, primarily for Euro/U.S. Dollar, British
The Company may elect to designate certain derivatives as hedging Pound/Euro and Japanese Yen/U.S. Dollar currency pairs. All derivatives are
instruments under the accounting standards for derivatives and hedging. The recognized on the Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value and classified
Company formally documents all relationships between designated hedging based on the instrument’s maturity date.
instruments and hedged items as well as its risk management objectives and
The following table presents the fair values of derivative instruments included within the Consolidated Balance Sheets as of May 31, 2016 and 2015:
Asset Derivatives Liability Derivatives
Balance Sheet Balance Sheet
Location 2016 2015 Location 2016 2015
(In millions)
Derivatives formally designated
as hedging instruments:
Foreign exchange forwards Prepaid expenses and
and options other current assets $ 447 $ 825 Accrued liabilities $ 38 $ 140
Interest rate swaps Prepaid expenses and
other current assets 7 78 Accrued liabilities 45 —
Foreign exchange forwards Deferred income taxes Deferred income taxes
and options and other assets 90 520 and other liabilities 12 4
Interest rate swaps Deferred income taxes Deferred income taxes
and other assets — — and other liabilities — —
Total derivatives formally
designated as hedging
instruments 544 1,423 95 144
Derivatives not designated as
hedging instruments:
Foreign exchange forwards Prepaid expenses and
and options other current assets 40 209 Accrued liabilities 76 20
Embedded derivatives Prepaid expenses and
other current assets 2 2 Accrued liabilities 2 2
Foreign exchange forwards Deferred income taxes Deferred income taxes
and options and other assets 26 — and other liabilities 19 —
Embedded derivatives Deferred income taxes Deferred income taxes
and other assets 5 5 and other liabilities 7 9
Total derivatives not designated
as hedging instruments 73 216 104 31
TOTAL DERIVATIVES $ 617 $ 1,639 $ 199 $ 175
118
Page#66
PART II
The following tables present the amounts affecting the Consolidated Statements of Income for the years ended May 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014:
Amount of Gain (Loss)
Recognized in Other Amount of Gain (Loss)
Comprehensive Income Reclassified From Accumulated
on Derivatives(1) Other Comprehensive Income into Income(1)
Location of Gain (Loss)
Year Ended May 31, Year Ended May 31,
Reclassified From Accumulated Other
2016 2015 2014 Comprehensive Income Into Income 2016 2015 2014
(In millions)
Derivatives designated as cash flow hedges:
Foreign exchange forwards and options $ 90 $ (202) $ (48) Revenues $ (88) $ (95) $ 14
Foreign exchange forwards and options (57) 1,109 (78) Cost of sales 586 220 12
Foreign exchange forwards and options — — 4 Total selling and administrative expense — — —
Foreign exchange forwards and options (25) 497 (21) Other (income) expense, net 219 136 10
Interest rate swaps (83) 76 — Interest expense (income), net — — —
Total designated cash flow hedges (75) 1,480 (143) 717 261 36
Derivatives designated as net investment hedges:
Foreign exchange forwards and options $ — $ — $ — Other (income) expense, net $ — $ — $ —
(1) For the years ended May 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014, the amounts recorded in Other (income) expense, net as a result of hedge ineffectiveness and the discontinuance of cash flow hedges
because the forecasted transactions were no longer probable of occurring were immaterial.
Amount of Gain (Loss) Recognized in
Income on Derivatives
Year Ended May 31,
Location of Gain (Loss) Recognized
2016 2015 2014 in Income on Derivatives
(In millions)
Derivatives designated as fair value hedges: K
-
Interest rate swaps(1) $ 2 $ 5 $ 5 Interest expense (income), net
0
1
Derivatives not designated as hedging instruments:
M
Foreign exchange forwards and options (68) 611 (75) Other (income) expense, net
R
Embedded derivatives $ (2) $ (1) $ (1) Other (income) expense, net
O
F
(1) All interest rate swaps designated as fair value hedges meet the shortcut method requirements under the accounting standards for derivatives and hedging. Accordingly, changes in the
fair values of the interest rate swaps are considered to exactly offset changes in the fair value of the underlying long-term debt. Refer to “Fair Value Hedges” in this note for additional detail.
Refer to Note 6 — Fair Value Measurements for a description of how the exposures, some of which are natural offsets to the Company’s existing
above financial instruments are valued and Note 14 — Accumulated Other foreign currency exposures. Under this program, the Company’s payments
Comprehensive Income and the Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ to these factories are adjusted for rate fluctuations in the basket of currencies
Equity for additional information on changes in Accumulated other (“factory currency exposure index”) in which the labor, materials and overhead
comprehensive income for the years ended May 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014. costs incurred by the factories in the production of NIKE branded products
(“factory input costs”) are denominated. For the portion of the indices
denominated in the local or functional currency of the factory, the Company
Cash Flow Hedges may elect to place formally designated cash flow hedges. For all currencies
within the indices, excluding the U.S. Dollar and the local or functional
The purpose of the Company’s foreign exchange risk management program currency of the factory, an embedded derivative contract is created upon the
is to lessen both the positive and negative effects of currency fluctuations on factory’s acceptance of NIKE’s purchase order. Embedded derivative
the Company’s consolidated results of operations, financial position and cash contracts are separated from the related purchase order, as further described
flows. Foreign currency exposures that the Company may elect to hedge in within the Embedded Derivatives section below.
this manner include product cost exposures, non-functional currency
The Company’s policy permits the utilization of derivatives to reduce its
denominated external and intercompany revenues, selling and administrative
foreign currency exposures where internal netting or other strategies cannot
expenses, investments in U.S. Dollar-denominated available-for-sale debt
be effectively employed. Typically, the Company may enter into hedge
securities and certain other intercompany transactions.
contracts starting up to 12 to 24 months in advance of the forecasted
Product cost exposures are primarily generated through non-functional transaction and may place incremental hedges up to 100% of the exposure
currency denominated product purchases and the foreign currency by the time the forecasted transaction occurs. The total notional amount of
adjustment program described below. NIKE entities primarily purchase outstanding foreign currency derivatives designated as cash flow hedges
products in two ways: (1) Certain NIKE entities purchase product from the was $11.5 billion as of May 31, 2016.
NIKE Trading Company (“NTC”), a wholly owned sourcing hub that buys
As of May 31, 2016, the Company had a series of forward-starting interest
NIKE branded products from third party factories, predominantly in U.S.
rate swap agreements with a total outstanding notional amount of $1.5 billion.
Dollars. The NTC, whose functional currency is the U.S. Dollar, then sells the
These instruments were designated as cash flow hedges of the variability in
product to NIKE entities in their respective functional currencies. When the
the expected cash outflows of interest payments on future debt due to
NTC sells to a NIKE entity with a different functional currency, the result is a
changes in benchmark interest rates. During the second quarter of fiscal
foreign currency exposure for the NTC. (2) Other NIKE entities purchase
2016, the Company terminated certain forward-starting interest rate swaps
product directly from third party factories in U.S. Dollars. These purchases
with a total notional amount of $1 billion in connection with the October 29,
generate a foreign currency exposure for those NIKE entities with a functional
2015 debt issuance (refer to Note 8 — Long-Term Debt). Upon termination of
currency other than the U.S. Dollar.
these forward-starting swaps, the Company received a cash payment from
The Company operates a foreign currency adjustment program with certain the related counterparties of $34 million, which was recorded in Accumulated
factories. The program is designed to more effectively manage foreign other comprehensive income and will be released through Interest expense
currency risk by assuming certain of the factories’ foreign currency (income), net as interest payments are made over the term of the issued debt.
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 119
Page#67
PART II
All changes in fair value of derivatives designated as cash flow hedges, are currently outstanding mature. As of May 31, 2016, the maximum term
excluding any ineffective portion, are recorded in Accumulated other over which the Company is hedging exposures to the variability of cash flows
comprehensive income until Net income is affected by the variability of cash for its forecasted transactions was 24 months.
flows of the hedged transaction. In most cases, amounts recorded
in Accumulated other comprehensive income will be released to Net
income in periods following the maturity of the related derivative, rather than at Fair Value Hedges
maturity. Effective hedge results are classified within the Consolidated
Statements of Income in the same manner as the underlying exposure. The The Company is also exposed to the risk of changes in the fair value of certain
results of hedges of non-functional currency denominated revenues and fixed-rate debt attributable to changes in interest rates. Derivatives used by
product cost exposures, excluding embedded derivatives, are recorded in the Company to hedge this risk are receive-fixed, pay-variable interest rate
Revenues or Cost of sales when the underlying hedged transaction affects swaps. All interest rate swaps designated as fair value hedges of the related
consolidated Net income. Results of hedges of selling and administrative long-term debt meet the shortcut method requirements under the accounting
expense are recorded together with those costs when the related expense is standards for derivatives and hedging. Accordingly, changes in the fair values
recorded. Amounts recorded in Accumulated other comprehensive of the interest rate swaps are considered to exactly offset changes in the fair
income related to forward-starting interest rate swaps will be released value of the underlying long-term debt. The cash flows associated with the
through Interest expense (income), net as interest payments are made over Company’s fair value hedges are periodic interest payments while the swaps
the term of the issued debt. Results of hedges of anticipated purchases and are outstanding, which are reflected within the Cash provided by operations
sales of U.S. Dollar-denominated available-for-sale securities are recorded in component of the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. The Company
Other (income) expense, net when the securities are sold. Results of hedges recorded no ineffectiveness from its interest rate swaps designated as fair
of certain anticipated intercompany transactions are recorded in Other value hedges for the years ended May 31, 2016, 2015 or 2014. On October
(income) expense, net when the transaction occurs. The Company classifies 15, 2015, the Company repaid the long-term debt which had previously been
the cash flows at settlement from these designated cash flow hedge hedged with these interest rate swaps. Accordingly, as of May 31, 2016, the
derivatives in the same category as the cash flows from the related hedged Company had no interest rate swaps designated as fair value hedges.
items, primarily within the Cash provided by operations component of the
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.
Net Investment Hedges
Premiums paid or received on options are initially recorded as deferred
charges or deferred credits, respectively. The Company assesses the
The Company has, in the past, hedged and may, in the future, hedge the risk
effectiveness of options based on the total cash flows method and records
of variability in foreign-currency-denominated net investments in wholly-
total changes in the options’ fair value to Accumulated other comprehensive
owned international operations. All changes in fair value of the derivatives
income to the degree they are effective.
designated as net investment hedges, except ineffective portions, are
reported in Accumulated other comprehensive income along with the foreign
The Company formally assesses, both at a hedge’s inception and on an
currency translation adjustments on those investments. The Company
ongoing basis, whether the derivatives that are used in the hedging
classifies the cash flows at settlement of its net investment hedges within the
transaction have been highly effective in offsetting changes in the cash flows
Cash used by investing activities component of the Consolidated Statements
of hedged items and whether those derivatives may be expected to remain
of Cash Flows. The Company assesses hedge effectiveness based on
highly effective in future periods. Effectiveness for cash flow hedges is
changes in forward rates. The Company recorded no ineffectiveness from net
assessed based on changes in forward rates. Ineffectiveness was 0 billion for
investment hedges for the years ended May 31, 2016, 2015 or 2014. The
the years ended May 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014.
Company had no outstanding net investment hedges as of May 31, 2016.
The Company discontinues hedge accounting prospectively when: (1) it
determines that the derivative is no longer highly effective in offsetting
Undesignated Derivative Instruments
changes in the cash flows of a hedged item (including hedged items such as
firm commitments or forecasted transactions); (2) the derivative expires or is
The Company may elect to enter into foreign exchange forwards to mitigate
sold, terminated or exercised; (3) it is no longer probable that the forecasted
the change in fair value of specific assets and liabilities on the balance sheet
transaction will occur; or (4) management determines that designating the
and/or the embedded derivative contracts. These forwards are not
derivative as a hedging instrument is no longer appropriate.
designated as hedging instruments under the accounting standards for
When the Company discontinues hedge accounting because it is no longer
derivatives and hedging. Accordingly, these undesignated instruments are
probable that the forecasted transaction will occur in the originally expected
recorded at fair value as a derivative asset or liability on the Consolidated
period, but is expected to occur within an additional two-month period of time
Balance Sheets with their corresponding change in fair value recognized
thereafter, the gain or loss on the derivative remains in Accumulated other
in Other (income) expense, net, together with the re-measurement gain or loss
comprehensive income and is reclassified to Net income when the forecasted
from the hedged balance sheet position or embedded derivative contract.
transaction affects consolidated Net income. However, if it is probable that a
The Company classifies the cash flows at settlement from undesignated
forecasted transaction will not occur by the end of the originally specified time
instruments in the same category as the cash flows from the related hedged
period or within an additional two-month period of time thereafter, the gains
items, primarily within the Cash provided by operations component of the
and losses that were in Accumulated other comprehensive income will be
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. The total notional amount of
recognized immediately in Other (income) expense, net. In all situations in
outstanding undesignated derivative instruments was $7.1 billion as
which hedge accounting is discontinued and the derivative remains
of May 31, 2016.
outstanding, the Company will carry the derivative at its fair value on the
Consolidated Balance Sheets, recognizing future changes in the fair value in
Other (income) expense, net. For the years ended May 31, 2016, 2015 and Embedded Derivatives
2014, the amounts recorded in Other (income) expense, net as a result of the
discontinuance of cash flow hedging because the forecasted transaction was As part of the foreign currency adjustment program described above, an
no longer probable of occurring were immaterial. embedded derivative contract is created upon the factory’s acceptance of
NIKE’s purchase order for currencies within the factory currency exposure
As of May 31, 2016, $460 million of deferred net gains (net of tax) on both
indices that are neither the U.S. Dollar nor the local or functional currency of
outstanding and matured derivatives in Accumulated other comprehensive
the factory. Embedded derivative contracts are treated as foreign currency
income are expected to be reclassified to Net income during the next 12
forward contracts that are bifurcated from the related purchase order and
months concurrent with the underlying hedged transactions also being
recorded at fair value as a derivative asset or liability on the Consolidated
recorded in Net income. Actual amounts ultimately reclassified to Net income
Balance Sheets with their corresponding change in fair value recognized
are dependent on the exchange rates in effect when derivative contracts that
in Other (income) expense, net, from the date a purchase order is accepted
120
Page#68
PART II
by a factory through the date the purchase price is no longer subject to foreign limited to the unrealized gains in such contracts should any of these
currency fluctuations. counterparties fail to perform as contracted. To manage this risk, the
Company has established strict counterparty credit guidelines that are
In addition, the Company has entered into certain other contractual
continually monitored.
agreements which have payments that are indexed to currencies that are not
the functional currency of either substantial party to the contracts. These The Company’s derivative contracts contain credit risk related contingent
payment terms expose NIKE to variability in foreign exchange rates and features designed to protect against significant deterioration in counterparties’
create embedded derivative contracts that must be bifurcated from the creditworthiness and their ultimate ability to settle outstanding derivative
related contract and recorded at fair value as derivative assets or liabilities on contracts in the normal course of business. The Company’s bilateral credit
the Consolidated Balance Sheets with their corresponding changes in fair related contingent features generally require the owing entity, either the
value recognized in Other (income) expense, net until each payment is settled. Company or the derivative counterparty, to post collateral for the portion of
the fair value in excess of $50 million should the fair value of outstanding
At May 31, 2016, the notional amount of all embedded derivatives
derivatives per counterparty be greater than $50 million. Additionally, a certain
outstanding was approximately $282 million.
level of decline in credit rating of either the Company or the counterparty could
also trigger collateral requirements. As of May 31, 2016, the Company was in
compliance with all credit risk-related contingent features and had derivative
Credit Risk
instruments with credit risk-related contingent features in a net liability position
of $3 million. Accordingly, the Company was not required to post any
The Company is exposed to credit-related losses in the event of
collateral as a result of these contingent features. Further, as of May 31, 2016,
nonperformance by counterparties to hedging instruments. The
the Company had received $105 million of cash collateral from various
counterparties to all derivative transactions are major financial institutions with
counterparties to its derivative contracts (refer to Note 6 — Fair Value
investment grade credit ratings. However, this does not eliminate the
Measurements). Given the considerations described above, the Company
Company’s exposure to credit risk with these institutions. This credit risk is
considers the impact of the risk of counterparty default to be immaterial.
NOTE 17 — Operating Segments and Related Information
K
The Company’s operating segments are evidence of the structure of the The primary financial measure used by the Company to evaluate performance
-
Company’s internal organization. The NIKE Brand segments are defined by of individual operating segments is earnings before interest and taxes
0
geographic regions for operations participating in NIKE Brand sales activity. (commonly referred to as “EBIT”), which represents Net income before 1
Interest expense (income), net and Income tax expense in the Consolidated M
Each NIKE Brand geographic segment operates predominantly in one
Statements of Income.
R
industry: the design, development, marketing and selling of athletic footwear,
O
apparel and equipment. The Company’s reportable operating segments for As part of the Company’s centrally managed foreign exchange risk
F
the NIKE Brand are: North America, Western Europe, Central & Eastern management program, standard foreign currency rates are assigned twice
Europe, Greater China, Japan and Emerging Markets, and include results for per year to each NIKE Brand entity in the Company’s geographic operating
the NIKE, Jordan and Hurley brands. The Company’s NIKE Brand Direct to segments and to Converse. These rates are set approximately nine and
Consumer operations are managed within each geographic operating twelve months in advance of the future selling seasons to which they relate
segment. Converse is also a reportable segment for the Company, and (specifically, for each currency, one standard rate applies to the fall and
operates in one industry: the design, marketing, licensing and selling of casual holiday selling seasons and one standard rate applies to the spring and
sneakers, apparel and accessories. summer selling seasons) based on average market spot rates in the calendar
month preceding the date they are established. Inventories and Cost of sales
Global Brand Divisions is included within the NIKE Brand for presentation
for geographic operating segments and Converse reflect use of these
purposes to align with the way management views the Company. Global
standard rates to record non-functional currency product purchases in the
Brand Divisions primarily represent NIKE Brand licensing businesses that are
entity’s functional currency. Differences between assigned standard foreign
not part of a geographic operating segment, and demand creation, operating
currency rates and actual market rates are included in Corporate, together
overhead and product creation and design expenses that are centrally
with foreign currency hedge gains and losses generated from the Company’s
managed for the NIKE Brand.
centrally managed foreign exchange risk management program and other
conversion gains and losses.
Corporate consists largely of unallocated general and administrative
expenses, including expenses associated with centrally managed
Accounts receivable, net, Inventories and Property, plant and equipment, net
departments; depreciation and amortization related to the Company’s
for operating segments are regularly reviewed by management and are
headquarters; unallocated insurance, benefit and compensation programs,
therefore provided below. Additions to long-lived assets as presented in the
including stock-based compensation; and certain foreign currency gains and
following table represent capital expenditures.
losses, including certain hedge gains and losses.
Certain prior year amounts have been reclassified to conform to fiscal 2016
presentation.
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 121
Page#69
PART II
Year Ended May 31,
2016 2015 2014
(In millions)
REVENUES
North America $ 14,764 $ 13,740 $ 12,299
Western Europe 5,884 5,705 4,979
Central & Eastern Europe 1,431 1,421 1,387
Greater China 3,785 3,067 2,602
Japan 869 755 771
Emerging Markets 3,701 3,898 3,949
Global Brand Divisions 73 115 125
Total NIKE Brand 30,507 28,701 26,112
Converse 1,955 1,982 1,684
Corporate (86) (82) 3
TOTAL NIKE CONSOLIDATED REVENUES $ 32,376 $ 30,601 $ 27,799
EARNINGS BEFORE INTEREST AND TAXES
North America $ 3,763 $ 3,645 $ 3,077
Western Europe 1,434 1,275 855
Central & Eastern Europe 289 249 279
Greater China 1,372 993 816
Japan 174 100 131
Emerging Markets 892 818 952
Global Brand Divisions (2,596) (2,267) (1,993)
Total NIKE Brand 5,328 4,813 4,117
Converse 487 517 496
Corporate (1,173) (1,097) (1,036)
Total NIKE Consolidated Earnings Before Interest and Taxes 4,642 4,233 3,577
Interest expense (income), net 19 28 33
TOTAL NIKE CONSOLIDATED INCOME BEFORE INCOME TAXES $ 4,623 $ 4,205 $ 3,544
ADDITIONS TO LONG-LIVED ASSETS
North America $ 242 $ 208 $ 240
Western Europe 215 216 120
Central & Eastern Europe 17 20 19
Greater China 44 69 63
Japan 13 15 9
Emerging Markets 51 37 55
Global Brand Divisions 258 225 225
Total NIKE Brand 840 790 731
Converse 39 69 30
Corporate 312 144 161
TOTAL ADDITIONS TO LONG-LIVED ASSETS $ 1,191 $ 1,003 $ 922
DEPRECIATION
North America $ 133 $ 121 $ 109
Western Europe 72 75 71
Central & Eastern Europe 12 12 11
Greater China 48 46 38
Japan 18 22 19
Emerging Markets 25 27 25
Global Brand Divisions 230 210 175
Total NIKE Brand 538 513 448
Converse 27 18 16
Corporate 84 75 54
TOTAL DEPRECIATION $ 649 $ 606 $ 518
122
Page#70
PART II
As of May 31,
2016 2015
(In millions)
ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE, NET
North America $ 1,689 $ 1,737
Western Europe 378 344
Central & Eastern Europe 194 242
Greater China 74 84
Japan 129 134
Emerging Markets 409 461
Global Brand Divisions 76 88
Total NIKE Brand 2,949 3,090
Converse 270 258
Corporate 22 10
TOTAL ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE, NET $ 3,241 $ 3,358
INVENTORIES
North America $ 2,363 $ 2,207
Western Europe 929 699
Central & Eastern Europe 210 169
Greater China 375 249
Japan 146 94
Emerging Markets 478 528
Global Brand Divisions 35 32
Total NIKE Brand 4,536 3,978
Converse 306 237
Corporate (4) 122
TOTAL INVENTORIES $ 4,838 $ 4,337
K
PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT, NET
-
North America $ 742 $ 632 0
1
Western Europe 589 451
M
Central & Eastern Europe 50 47
R
Greater China 234 254
O
Japan 223 205
F
Emerging Markets 109 103
Global Brand Divisions 511 484
Total NIKE Brand 2,458 2,176
Converse 125 122
Corporate 937 713
TOTAL PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT, NET $ 3,520 $ 3,011
Revenues by Major Product Lines
Revenues to external customers for NIKE Brand products are attributable to sales of footwear, apparel and equipment. Other revenues to external customers
consist primarily of sales by Converse.
Year Ended May 31,
2016 2015 2014
(In millions)
Footwear $ 19,871 $ 18,318 $ 16,208
Apparel 9,067 8,637 8,109
Equipment 1,496 1,631 1,670
Other 1,942 2,015 1,812
TOTAL NIKE CONSOLIDATED REVENUES $ 32,376 $ 30,601 $ 27,799
Revenues and Long-Lived Assets by United States, which are primarily composed of net property, plant &
equipment, were $2,241 million and $1,877 million at May 31, 2016 and
Geographic Area
2015, respectively. Long-lived assets attributable to operations in Belgium
were $348 million and $234 million at May 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
After allocation of revenues for Global Brand Divisions, Converse and
Long-lived assets attributable to operations in China were $240 million and
Corporate to geographical areas based on the location where the sales
$267 million at May 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively. Long-lived assets
originated, revenues by geographical area are essentially the same as
attributable to operations in Japan were $223 million and $205 million at
reported above for the NIKE Brand operating segments with the exception of
May 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
the United States. Revenues derived in the United States were $15,304
million, $14,180 million and $12,711 million for the years ended May 31,
2016, 2015 and 2014, respectively. The Company’s largest concentrations of
Major Customers
long-lived assets primarily consist of the Company’s world headquarters and
distribution facilities in the United States and distribution facilities in Belgium,
No customer accounted for 10% or more of the Company’s net revenues
China and Japan. Long-lived assets attributable to operations in the
during the years ended May 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014.
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 123
Page#71
PART II
ITEM 9. Changes in and Disagreements with
Accountants on Accounting and Financial
Disclosure
There has been no change of accountants nor any disagreements with accountants on any matter of accounting principles or practices or financial statement
disclosure required to be reported under this Item.
ITEM 9A. Controls and Procedures
We maintain disclosure controls and procedures that are designed to ensure disclosure controls and procedures were effective at the reasonable
information required to be disclosed in our Exchange Act reports is recorded, assurance level as of May 31, 2016.
processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the
“Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting”
SEC’s rules and forms and that such information is accumulated and
is included in Item 8 of this Report.
communicated to our management, including our Chief Executive Officer and
Chief Financial Officer, as appropriate, to allow for timely decisions regarding
We have commenced several transformation initiatives to centralize and
required disclosure. In designing and evaluating the disclosure controls and
simplify our business processes and systems. These are long-term initiatives,
procedures, management recognizes that any controls and procedures, no
which we believe will enhance our internal control over financial reporting due
matter how well designed and operated, can provide only reasonable
to increased automation and further integration of related processes. We will
assurance of achieving the desired control objectives, and management is
continue to monitor our internal control over financial reporting for
required to apply its judgment in evaluating the cost-benefit relationship of
effectiveness throughout the transformation.
possible controls and procedures.
There have not been any other changes in our internal control over financial
We carry out a variety of ongoing procedures, under the supervision and with
reporting during our most recent fiscal quarter that have materially affected, or
the participation of our management, including our Chief Executive Officer
are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial
and Chief Financial Officer, to evaluate the effectiveness of the design and
reporting.
operation of our disclosure controls and procedures. Based on the foregoing,
our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer concluded that our
ITEM 9B. Other Information
No disclosure is required under this Item.
124
Page#72
PART III
PART III
ITEM 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate
Governance
The information required by Item 401 of Regulation S-K regarding directors is information required by Item 406 of Regulation S-K is included under
included under “Election of Directors” in the definitive Proxy Statement for our “Corporate Governance — Code of Business Conduct and Ethics” in the
2016 Annual Meeting of Shareholders and is incorporated herein by definitive Proxy Statement for our 2016 Annual Meeting of Shareholders and
reference. The information required by Item 401 of Regulation S-K regarding is incorporated herein by reference. The information required by
executive officers is included under “Executive Officers of the Registrant” in Items 407(d)(4) and (d)(5) of Regulation S-K regarding the Audit Committee of
Item 1 of this Report. The information required by Item 405 of Regulation S-K the Board of Directors is included under “Corporate Governance — Board
is included under “Election of Directors — Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership Committees” in the definitive Proxy Statement for our 2016 Annual Meeting of
Reporting Compliance” in the definitive Proxy Statement for our 2016 Annual Shareholders and is incorporated herein by reference.
K
Meeting of Shareholders and is incorporated herein by reference. The
-
0
1
M
ITEM 11. Executive Compensation
R
O
F
The information required by Items 402, 407(e)(4) and 407(e)(5) of Regulation — Compensation Committee Interlocks and Insider Participation,” and
S-K regarding executive compensation is included under “Election of “Compensation Committee Report” in the definitive Proxy Statement for our
Directors — Director Compensation for Fiscal 2016,” “Compensation 2016 Annual Meeting of Shareholders and is incorporated herein by
Discussion and Analysis,” “Executive Compensation,” “Election of Directors reference.
ITEM 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial
Owners and Management and Related
Stockholder Matters
The information required by Item 201(d) of Regulation S-K is included under Regulation S-K is included under “Election of Directors — Stock Holdings of
“Executive Compensation — Equity Compensation Plans” in the definitive Certain Owners and Management” in the definitive Proxy Statement for our
Proxy Statement for our 2016 Annual Meeting of Shareholders and is 2016 Annual Meeting of Shareholders and is incorporated herein by
incorporated herein by reference. The information required by Item 403 of reference.
ITEM 13. Certain Relationships and Related
Transactions and Director Independence
The information required by Items 404 and 407(a) of Regulation S-K is included under “Election of Directors — Transactions with Related Persons” and
“Corporate Governance — Director Independence” in the definitive Proxy Statement for our 2016 Annual Meeting of Shareholders and is incorporated herein by
reference.
ITEM 14. Principal Accountant Fees and Services
The information required by Item 9(e) of Schedule 14A is included under “Ratification Of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm” in the definitive Proxy
Statement for our 2016 Annual Meeting of Shareholders and is incorporated herein by reference.
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 125
Page#73
PART IV
PART IV
ITEM 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules
(a) The following documents are filed as part of this report:
Form 10-K
Page No.
1. Financial Statements:
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 98
Consolidated Statements of Income for each of the three years ended May 31, 2016, May 31, 2015 99
and May 31, 2014
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income for each of the three years ended May 31, 2016, 100
May 31, 2015 and May 31, 2014
Consolidated Balance Sheets at May 31, 2016 and May 31, 2015 101
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for each of the three years ended May 31, 2016, May 31, 102
2015 and May 31, 2014
Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity for each of the three years ended May 31, 2016, 103
May 31, 2015 and May 31, 2014
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 104
2. Financial Statement Schedule:
II — Valuation and Qualifying Accounts 129
All other schedules are omitted because they are not applicable or the required information is
shown in the financial statements or notes thereto.
126
Page#74
PART IV
3. Exhibits:
3.1 Restated Articles of Incorporation, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Company’s Quarterly Report on
Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended November 30, 2015).
3.2 Third Restated Bylaws, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.2 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K
filed June 21, 2013).
4.1 Restated Articles of Incorporation, as amended (see Exhibit 3.1).
4.2 Third Restated Bylaws, as amended (see Exhibit 3.2).
4.3 Indenture dated as of April 26, 2013, by and between NIKE, Inc. and Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas, as trustee
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Company’s Form 8-Q filed April 26, 2013).
4.4 Second Supplemental Indenture, dated as of October 29, 2015, by and between NIKE, Inc. and Deutsche Bank Trust Company
Americas, as trustee, including the form of 3.875% Notes due 2045 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 5.2 to the Company’s
Form 8-Q filed October 29, 2015).
10.1 Form of Non-Statutory Stock Option Agreement for options granted to non-employee directors prior to May 31, 2010 under the
1990 Stock Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed
June 21, 2005).*
10.2 Form of Non-Statutory Stock Option Agreement for options granted to non-employee directors after May 31, 2010 under the
1990 Stock Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the
fiscal year ended May 31, 2010).*
10.3 Form of Non-Statutory Stock Option Agreement for options granted to executives prior to May 31, 2010 under the 1990 Stock
Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year
ended May 31, 2009).*
10.4 Form of Restricted Stock Agreement for non-employee directors under the 1990 Stock Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.4 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2014).*
K
10.5 Form of Non-Statutory Stock Option Agreement for options granted to executives after May 31, 2010 under the Stock Incentive
-
Plan (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31,
0
2015).*
1
10.6 Form of Indemnity Agreement entered into between the Company and each of its officers and directors (incorporated by M
reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2008).*
R
10.7 NIKE, Inc. 1990 Stock Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.7 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K
O
for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2014).*
F
10.8 NIKE, Inc. Executive Performance Sharing Plan (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.7 to the Company’s Annual Report on
Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2012).*
10.9 NIKE, Inc. Long-Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.9 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K
for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015).*
10.10 NIKE, Inc. Deferred Compensation Plan (Amended and Restated effective April 1, 2013) (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.9 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2013).*
10.11 NIKE, Inc. Deferred Compensation Plan (Amended and Restated effective June 1, 2004) (applicable to amounts deferred before
January 1, 2005) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.6 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year
ended May 31, 2004).*
10.12 Amendment No. 1 effective January 1, 2008 to the NIKE, Inc. Deferred Compensation Plan (June 1, 2004 Restatement)
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.9 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31,
2009).*
10.13 NIKE, Inc. Foreign Subsidiary Employee Stock Purchase Plan (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended November 30, 2008).*
10.14 Amended and Restated Covenant Not To Compete and Non-Disclosure Agreement between NIKE, Inc. and Mark G. Parker
dated July 24, 2008 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed July 24,
2008).*
10.15 Form of Restricted Stock Agreement under the Stock Incentive Plan for awards after May 31, 2010 (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.15 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015).*
10.16 Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement under the Stock Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.16 to the
Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015).*
10.17 Covenant Not to Compete and Non-Disclosure Agreement between NIKE, Inc. and Andrew Campion dated January 23, 2007.*
10.18 Covenant Not to Compete and Non-Disclosure Agreement between NIKE, Inc. and Eric D. Sprunk dated April 18, 2001
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.23 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31,
2010).*
10.19 Covenant Not to Compete and Non-Disclosure Agreement between NIKE, Inc. and Trevor A. Edwards dated November 14,
2002 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.19 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended
May 31, 2008).*
10.20 Covenant Not to Compete and Non-Disclosure Agreement between NIKE, Inc. and Jeanne Jackson dated March 4, 2009
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.21 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31,
2014).*
10.21 Policy for Recoupment of Incentive Compensation (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to the Company’s Current Report
on Form 8-K filed July 20, 2010).*
10.22 Credit Agreement dated as of August 28, 2015 among NIKE, Inc., Bank of America, N.A., as Administrative Agent, Citibank
N.A., as Syndication Agent, Deutsche Bank A.G. New York Branch and HSBC Bank USA, National Association, as Co-
Documentation Agents, and the other Banks named therein (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current
Report on Form 8-K filed September 2, 2015).
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 127
Page#75
PART IV
10.23 Executive Performance Sharing Plan (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K
filed September 23, 2015).
10.24 Stock Incentive Plan, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed
September 23, 2015).
12.1 Computation of Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges.
21 Subsidiaries of the Registrant.
23 Consent of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm (included within this Annual Report
on Form 10-K).
31.1 Rule 13a-14(a)/15d-14(a) Certification of Chief Executive Officer.
31.2 Rule 13a-14(a)/15d-14(a) Certification of Chief Financial Officer.
32 Section 1350 Certifications.
101.INS XBRL Instance Document
101.SCH XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema
101.CAL XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase
101.DEF XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Document
101.LAB XBRL Taxonomy Extension Label Linkbase
101.PRE XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation Linkbase
* Management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
The Exhibits filed herewith do not include certain instruments with respect to long-term debt of NIKE and its subsidiaries, inasmuch as the total amount of debt
authorized under any such instrument does not exceed 10 percent of the total assets of NIKE and its subsidiaries on a consolidated basis. NIKE agrees, pursuant
to Item 601(b)(4)(iii) of Regulation S-K, that it will furnish a copy of any such instrument to the SEC upon request.
Upon written request to Investor Relations, NIKE, Inc., One Bowerman Drive, Beaverton, Oregon 97005-6453, NIKE will furnish shareholders with a copy of any
Exhibit upon payment of $0.10 per page, which represents our reasonable expenses in furnishing Exhibits.
128
Page#76
PART IV
SCHEDULE II — Valuation and Qualifying Accounts
Balance at Charged to Costs Charged to Balance at End
(In millions) Beginning of Period and Expenses Other Accounts(1) Write-Offs, Net of Period
Sales returns reserve
For the year ended May 31, 2014 $ 241 $ 619 $ (3) $ (549) $ 308
For the year ended May 31, 2015 308 726 (35) (620) 379
For the year ended May 31, 2016 379 788 (15) (708) 444
Allowance for doubtful accounts(2)
For the year ended May 31, 2014 $ 104 $ 13 $ (2) $ (37) $ 78
For the year ended May 31, 2015 78 35 (15) (20) 78
For the year ended May 31, 2016 78 52 (2) (85) 43
(1) Amounts included in this column primarily relate to foreign currency translation.
(2) Includes both current and non-current portions of the allowance for doubtful accounts. The non-current portion is included in Deferred income taxes and other assets on the Consolidated
Balance Sheets.
K
-
0
1
M
R
O
F
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 129
Page#77
PART IV
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
We hereby consent to the incorporation by reference in the Registration Statements on Form S-8 (Nos. 033-63995, 333-63581, 333-63583, 333-68864, 333-
68886, 333-71660, 333-104822, 333-117059, 333-133360, 333-164248, 333-171647, 333-173727 and 333-208900) of NIKE, Inc. of our report dated
July 21, 2016 relating to the financial statements, financial statement schedule and the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, which appears in
this Form 10-K.
/s/ PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP
Portland, Oregon
July 21, 2016
130
Page#78
PART IV
Signatures
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by
the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
NIKE, INC.
By: /s/ MARK G. PARKER
Mark G. Parker
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer
Date: July 21, 2016
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the
registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature Title Date
PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER AND DIRECTOR:
/s/ MARK G. PARKER
Mark G. Parker Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer July 21, 2016
PRINCIPAL FINANCIAL OFFICER:
/s/ ANDREW CAMPION
Andrew Campion Chief Financial Officer July 21, 2016
PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING OFFICER:
/s/ CHRIS L. ABSTON
Chris L. Abston Corporate Controller July 21, 2016
K
-
DIRECTORS:
0
1
/s/ ELIZABETH J. COMSTOCK
Elizabeth J. Comstock Director July 21, 2016 M
R
/s/ JOHN G. CONNORS
O
John G. Connors Director July 21, 2016
F
/s/ TIMOTHY D. COOK
Timothy D. Cook Director July 21, 2016
/s/ JOHN J. DONAHOE II
John J. Donahoe II Director July 21, 2016
/s/ ALAN B. GRAF, JR.
Alan B. Graf, Jr. Director July 21, 2016
/s/ TRAVIS A. KNIGHT
Travis A. Knight Director July 21, 2016
/s/ JOHN C. LECHLEITER
John C. Lechleiter Director July 21, 2016
/s/ MICHELLE A. PELUSO
Michelle A. Peluso Director July 21, 2016
/s/ JOHNATHAN A. RODGERS
Johnathan A. Rodgers Director July 21, 2016
/s/ JOHN R. THOMPSON, JR.
John R. Thompson, Jr. Director July 21, 2016
/s/ PHYLLIS M. WISE
Phyllis M. Wise Director July 21, 2016
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 131
Page#79
PART IV
EXHIBIT 12.1 NIKE, Inc. Computation of Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges
The following disclosure reflects the Company’s continuing operations:
Year Ended May 31,
2016 2015 2014 2013 2012
(In millions)
Income before income taxes $ 4,623 $ 4,205 $ 3,544 $ 3,256 $ 3,011
Capitalized interest, net of amortization (3) — — — —
Adjusted income before income taxes 4,620 4,205 3,544 3,256 3,011
Add fixed charges:
Interest expense(1)(2) 74 60 58 23 31
Interest component of leases(3) 66 59 53 48 42
Total Fixed Charges 140 119 111 71 73
Earnings before income taxes and fixed charges $ 4,760 $ 4,324 $ 3,655 $ 3,327 $ 3,084
Ratio of earnings to total fixed charges 34.0 36.3 32.9 46.9 42.2
(1) Interest expense includes interest both expensed and capitalized and amortization of premiums, discounts and capitalized expenses related to indebtedness.
(2) Interest expense does not include interest related to uncertain tax positions.
(3) Interest component of leases includes one-tenth of rental expense which approximates the interest component of operating leases.
132
Page#80
PART IV
Subsidiaries of the Registrant
Entity Name Jurisdiction of Formation
All Star C.V. Netherlands
American Converse S.L.U. Spain
American NIKE S.L.U. Spain
A.S. Roma Merchandising S.R.L. Italy
BRS NIKE Taiwan Inc. Taiwan
Converse (Asia Pacific) Limited Hong Kong
Converse Canada Corp. Canada
Converse Canada Holding B.V. Netherlands
Converse Deutschland GmbH Germany
Converse do Brasil Ltda. Brazil
Converse Europe Limited United Kingdom
Converse Footwear Technical Service (Zhongshan) Co., Ltd. People’s Republic of China
Converse France S.A.S France
Converse Holdings LLC Delaware
Converse Hong Kong Holding Company Limited Hong Kong
Converse Hong Kong Limited Hong Kong
Converse Inc. Delaware
Converse Korea LLC South Korea
Converse Netherlands B.V. Netherlands
Converse Retail B.V. Netherlands
Converse Retail Italy S.r.l. Italy
K
Converse Sporting Goods (China) Co., Ltd. People’s Republic of China
-
0
Converse Trading Company B.V. Netherlands
1
F.C. Internazionale Merchandising s.r.l. Italy
M
French Football Merchandising S.A.S. France
R
Futbol Club Barcelona Merchandising, S.L. Spain
O
Hurley 999, S.L.U. Spain
F
Hurley Australia Pty. Ltd. Australia
Hurley International LLC Oregon
Hurley Phantom C.V. Netherlands
LATAM Comercio de Productos Esportivos Ltda. Brazil
NIKE 360 Holding B.V. Netherlands
NIKE 360 Jordan with Limited Liability Jordan
NIKE Air Ace B.V. Netherlands
NIKE Air Max LLC Delaware
NIKE Amplify LLC Delaware
NIKE Argentina S.R.L. Argentina
NIKE Asia Holding B.V. Netherlands
NIKE Australia Pty. Ltd. Australia
NIKE CA LLC Delaware
NIKE Canada Corp. Canada
NIKE Canada Holding B.V. Netherlands
NIKE Chile B.V. Netherlands
NIKE China Holding HK Limited Hong Kong
NIKE Codrus Coöperatief U.A. Netherlands
NIKE Commercial (China) Co., Ltd. People’s Republic of China
NIKE CR d.o.o Croatia
NIKE Czech s.r.o. Czech Republic
NIKE de Chile Ltda. Chile
NIKE de Mexico, S. de R.L. de C.V. Mexico
NIKE Denmark ApS Denmark
NIKE Deutschland GmbH Germany
NIKE do Brasil Comercio e Participacoes Ltda. Brazil
NIKE Elevate C.V. Netherlands
NIKE Europe Holding B.V. Netherlands
NIKE European Operations Netherlands B.V. Netherlands
NIKE Finance Ltd. Bermuda
NIKE Finland OY Finland
NIKE France S.A.S. France
NIKE Fuel B.V. Netherlands
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 133
Page#81
PART IV
Entity Name Jurisdiction of Formation
NIKE Fundamentals C.V. Netherlands
NIKE Galaxy Holding B.V. Netherlands
NIKE Gesellschaft m.b.H. Austria
NIKE Glide C.V. Netherlands
NIKE Global Holding B.V. Netherlands
NIKE GLOBAL SERVICES PTE. LTD. Singapore
NIKE Global Trading B.V. Netherlands
NIKE GLOBAL TRADING PTE. LTD. Singapore
NIKE Group Holding B.V. Netherlands
NIKE Hellas EPE Greece
NIKE Holding, LLC Delaware
NIKE Hong Kong Limited Hong Kong
NIKE Huarache Bermuda
NIKE Hungary LLC Hungary
NIKE Ignite LLC Delaware
NIKE IHM, Inc. Missouri
NIKE India Holding B.V. Netherlands
NIKE India Private Limited India
NIKE Innovate C.V. Netherlands
NIKE International Holding B.V. Netherlands
NIKE International Holding, Inc. Delaware
NIKE International LLC Delaware
NIKE International Ltd. Bermuda
NIKE Israel Ltd. Israel
NIKE Italy S.R.L. Italy
NIKE Japan Corp. Japan
NIKE Japan Group LLC Japan
NIKE Korea LLC South Korea
NIKE Laser Holding B.V. Netherlands
NIKE Licenciamentos Ltda. Brazil
NIKE Lightning C.V. Netherlands
NIKE Logistics Yugen Kaisha Japan
NIKE Maxim C.V. Netherlands
NIKE Mercurial Corp. Delaware
NIKE Mercurial Hong Kong Limited Hong Kong
NIKE Mercurial Licensing Limited United Kingdom
NIKE Mercurial Ltd. United Kingdom
NIKE Mercurial I Limited United Kingdom
NIKE Mexico Holdings, LLC Delaware
NIKE New Zealand Company New Zealand
NIKE Norway AS Norway
NIKE NZ Holding B.V. Netherlands
NIKE Offshore Holding B.V. Netherlands
NIKE Oscillate LLC Delaware
NIKE Panama S. de R.L. Panama
NIKE Philippines, Inc. Philippines
NIKE Poland Sp. z o.o. Poland
NIKE Retail B.V. Netherlands
NIKE Retail Hellas Ltd. Greece
NIKE Retail Israel Ltd. Israel
NIKE Retail LLC Russia
NIKE Retail Poland Sp. z o.o. Poland
NIKE Retail Services, Inc. Oregon
NIKE Retail Turkey Turkey
NIKE Revolution C.V. Netherlands
NIKE Russia LLC Russia
NIKE SALES (MALAYSIA) SDN. BHD. Malaysia
NIKE Servicios de Mexico, S. de R.L. de C.V. Mexico
NIKE SINGAPORE PTE. LTD. Singapore
NIKE Slovakia s.r.o. Slovakia
NIKE Sourcing India Private Limited India
NIKE Sourcing (Guangzhou) Co., Ltd. People’s Republic of China
NIKE South Africa (Proprietary) Limited South Africa
134
Page#82
PART IV
Entity Name Jurisdiction of Formation
NIKE South Africa Holdings LLC Delaware
NIKE Sphere C.V. Netherlands
NIKE Sports (China) Company, Ltd. People’s Republic of China
NIKE Suzhou Holding HK Limited Hong Kong
NIKE Sweden AB Sweden
NIKE (Switzerland) GmbH Switzerland
NIKE Taiwan Limited Taiwan
NIKE (Thailand) Limited Thailand
NIKE TN, Inc. Oregon
NIKE Trading Company B.V. Netherlands
NIKE UK Holding B.V. Netherlands
NIKE (UK) Limited United Kingdom
NIKE USA, Inc. Oregon
NIKE Vapor Ltd. United Kingdom
NIKE Victory Cooperatief U.A. Netherlands
NIKE Vietnam Limited Liability Company Vietnam
NIKE Vision, Timing and Techlab, LP Texas
NIKE Vomero Cooperatief U.A. Netherlands
NIKE Wholesale LLC Slovenia
NIKE Woodside I, LLC Oregon
NIKE Woodside II, LLC Oregon
NIKE Woodside I Holdings, Inc. Oregon
NIKE Woodside II Holdings, Inc. Oregon
NIKE Zoom LLC Delaware
K
North West Merchandising Limited United Kingdom
-
0
Piemonte Merchandising S.R.L. Italy
1
PT Hurley Indonesia Indonesia
M
PT NIKE Indonesia Indonesia
R
Triax Insurance, Inc. Hawaii
O
Twin Dragons Global Limited Hong Kong
F
Twin Dragons Holding B.V. Netherlands
Yugen Kaisha Hurley Japan Japan
NIKE, INC. 2016 Annual Report and Notice of Annual Meeting 135
Page#83
D I R E C T O R S C O R P O R A T E O F F I C E R S
Elizabeth J. Comstock(3)(4) Mark G. Parker
Vice Chair Chairman of the Board of Directors, President & Chief Executive
General Electric Company Officer
Fairfield, Connecticut
David J. Ayre
John G. Connors(2)(3) Executive Vice President, Global Human Resources
Partner
Andrew Campion
Ignition Partners LLC
Executive Vice President & Chief Financial Officer
Bellevue, Washington
Trevor A. Edwards
Timothy D. Cook(4)(6)
President, NIKE Brand
Chief Executive Officer
Apple Inc.
Hilary K. Krane
Cupertino, California
Executive Vice President, Chief Administrative Officer & General
Counsel
John J. Donahoe II(2)(3)(6)
Chairman
John F. Slusher
PayPal Holdings, Inc.
Executive Vice President, Global Sports Marketing
San Jose, California
Michael Spillane
Alan B. Graf, Jr.(2)(6)
President, Product & Merchandising
Executive Vice President & Chief Financial Officer
Eric D. Sprunk
FedEx Corporation
Memphis, Tennessee Chief Operating Officer
Travis A. Knight(1)(5) Kelley K. Hall
President & Chief Executive Officer Vice President, Corporate Finance & Treasurer
LAIKA, LLC
John F. Coburn III
Hillsboro, Oregon
Vice President & Corporate Secretary
John C. Lechleiter(3)(4)(6)
Jeanine Hayes
Chairman of the Board, President & Chief Executive Officer
Chief Intellectual Property Officer & Assistant Secretary
Eli Lilly and Company
Indianapolis, Indiana
Adrian L. Bell
Senior Counsel, Corporate Governance & Assistant Secretary
Mark G. Parker(1)
Chairman of the Board, President & Chief Executive Officer
NIKE, Inc.
Beaverton, Oregon
Michelle A. Peluso(2)(5)
Venture Partner
Technology Crossover Ventures
New York, New York
Johnathan A. Rodgers(4)(5)
President & Chief Executive Officer (Retired)
TV One, LLC
Silver Springs, Maryland
John R. Thompson, Jr.(5)
Assistant to the President of Georgetown University for Urban Affairs
Georgetown University
Washington, D.C.
Phyllis M. Wise(5)(6)
Faculty Member
University of Illinois, at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, Illinois
(1) Member — Executive Committee
(2) Member — Audit Committee
(3) Member — Finance Committee
(4) Member — Compensation Committee
(5) Member — Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Committee
(6) Member — Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee
136
Page#84
S U B S I D I A R I E S L O C A T I O N S
WORLD HEADQUARTERS
CONVERSE INC.
One Bowerman Drive
Davide Grasso
Beaverton, Oregon 97005-6453
Chief Executive Officer
160 North Washington St.
EUROPEAN HEADQUARTERS
Boston, Massachusetts 02114
Colosseum 1
1213 NL Hilversum
The Netherlands
HURLEY INTERNATIONAL LLC
GREATER CHINA HEADQUARTERS
Robert W. Coombes
LiNa Building
President & Chief Executive Officer
Tower 1, No. 99
1945 Placentia Avenue Jiangwancheng Road
Costa Mesa, Yangpu District
California 92627 Shanghai, China 200438
S H A R E H O L D E R I N F O R M A T I O N
I N D E P E N D E N T A C C O U N T A N T S
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
805 SW Broadway, Suite 800
Portland, Oregon 97205
R E G I S T R A R A N D S T O C K T R A N S F E R A G E N T
Computershare Trust Company, N.A.
P.O. Box 30170
College Station, Texas 77842-3170
800-756-8200
Hearing Impaired #
TDD: 800-952-9245
http://www.computershare.com
Shareholder Information
NIKE, Inc. common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange under trading symbol ‘NKE.’ Copies of the Company’s Form 10-K or Form
10-Q reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission are available from the Company without charge. To request a copy, please call
800-640-8007 or write to NIKE’s Investor Relations Department at NIKE World Headquarters, One Bowerman Drive, Beaverton, Oregon 97005-
6453. Copies are available on the investor relations website, http://investors.nike.com.
Dividend Payments
Quarterly dividends on NIKE common stock, when declared by the Board of Directors, are paid on or about July 5, October 5, January 5, and April 5. Additional
financial information is available at http://investors.nike.com.
Other Shareholder Assistance
Communications concerning shareholder address changes, stock transfers, changes of ownership, lost stock certificates, payment of dividends, dividend check
replacements, duplicate mailings, or other account services should be directed to the Company’s Registrar and Stock Transfer Agent at the address or telephone
number above.
NIKE, the Swoosh Design, and Just Do It are registered trademarks of NIKE, Inc.
Page#85
NIKE, INC.
One Bowerman Drive
Beaverton, OR 97005-6453
www.nike.com